PETER AND WENDY 

Copyright, 1911, by 

CHARLES SCRIBNER'S SONS 



MARGARET OGILVY 

Copyright, 1896, by 

CHARLES SCRIBNER'S SONS 




CONTENTS 

Peter and Wendy: 

CHAPTER PAQB 

I Peter Breaks Through 1 

II The Shadow 14 

III Come Away, Come Away! 28 

IV The Flight 48 

V The Island Come True 62 

VI The Little House 78 

VII The Home Under the Ground .... 91 

VIII The Mermaids' Lagoon 101 

IX The Never Bird 119 

X TheH^yHoAe' V (.';vii.\ . . . . 124 

XI Wendy's Stpe-iy ; ; ;.j ;.'.,•* ' 134 

XII The Children '.Are Carded Off . . . 146 

XIII Do You BiLiyvE'iiv'^AiRlifs? .... 153 

XIV The Pirate Ship 166 

XV "Hook or Me This Time" 177 

XVI The Return Home 192 

XVII When Wendy Grew Up 205 



Margaret Ogilvy 221 

v 



ILLUSTRATIONS 

from drawings by f. d. bedford 

Peter and Wendy 

Peter flew in Frontispiece 



FACING 
PAGE 



The birds were flown 46 

The Never Never Land 54 

Peter on guard 88 

Wendy's story 134 

"This man is mine" 188 

Peter and Jane . . . . ..... . . . . 216 

Margaret Ogilvy ,.."». 225 



vn 



PETER AND WENDY 



PETER AND WENDY 

CHAPTER I 

PETER BREAKS THROUGH 

A LL children, except one, grow up. They soon 
ii know that they will grow up, and the way 
Wendy knew was this. One day when she was 
two years old she was playing in a garden, and 
she plucked another flower and ran with it to her 
mother. I suppose she must have looked rather 
delightful, for Mrs. Darling put her hand to her 
heart and cried, "Oh, why can't you remain like 
this for ever!" This was all that passed between 
them on the subject, but henceforth Wendy knew 
that she must grow up. You always know after 
you are two. Two is the beginning of the end. 

Of course they lived at 14, and until Wendy 
came her mother was the chief one. She was a 
lovely lady, with a romantic mind and such a 
sweet mocking mouth. Her romantic mind was 

1 



PETER AND WENDY 

like the tiny boxes, one within the other, that 
come from the puzzling East, however many you 
discover there is always one more; and her sweet 
mocking mouth had one kiss on it that Wendy 
could never get, though there it was, perfectly 
conspicuous in the right-hand corner. 

The way Mr. Darling won her was this: the 
many gentlemen who had been boys when she was 
a girl discovered simultaneously that they loved 
her, and they all ran to her house to propose to 
her except Mr. Darling, who took a cab and 
nipped in first, and so he got her. He got all of 
her, except the innermost box and the kiss. He 
never knew about the box, and in time he gave up 
trying for the kiss. Wendy thought Napoleon 
could have got it, but I can picture him trying, and 
then going off in a passion, slamming the door. 

Mr. Darling used to boast to Wendy that her 
mother not only loved him but respected him. He 
was one of those deep ones who know about stocks 
and shares. Of course no one really knows, but 
he quite seemed to know, and he often said stocks 
were up and shares were down in a way that would 
have made any woman respect him. 

Mrs. Darling was married in white, and at first 
she kept the books perfectly, almost gleefully, as 
if it were a game, not so much as a Brussels sprout 
was missing; but by and by whole cauliflowers 
dropped out, and instead of them there were pic* 

2 



PETER BREAKS THROUGH 

tures of babies without faces. She drew them 
when she should have been totting up. They 
were Mrs. Darling's guesses. 

Wendy came first, then John, then Michael. 

For a week or two after Wendy came it was 
doubtful whether they would be able to keep her, 
as she was another mouth to feed. Mr. Darlin^ 
was frightfully proud of her, but he was very 
honourable, and he sat on the edge of Mrs. Dar- 
ling's bed, holding her hand and calculating ex- 
penses, while she looked at him imploringly. She 
wanted to risk it, come what might, but that was 
not his way; his way was with a pencil and a 
piece of paper, and if she confused him with sug- 
gestions he had to begin at the beginning again. 

"Now don't interrupt," he would beg of her. 

"I have one pound seventeen here, and two and 
six at the office; I can cut off my coffee at the of- 
fice, say ten shillings, making two nine and six, 
with your eighteen and three makes threenineseven, 
with five naught naught in my cheque-book makes 
eight nine seven, — who is that moving? — eight 
nine seven, dot and carry seven — don't speak, my 
own — and the pound you lent to that man who 
came to the door — quiet, child — dot and carry 
child — there, you 've done it! — did I say nine nine 
seven? yes, I said nine nine seven; the question is, 
can we try it for a year on nine nine seven?" 

"Of course we can, George," she cried. But she 

3 



PETER AND WENDY 

was prejudiced in Wendy's favour, and he was 
really the grander character of the two. 

"Remember mumps," he warned her almost 
threateningly, and off he went again. "Mumps 
one pound, that is what I have put down, but I 
daresay it will be more like thirty shillings — don't 
speak — measles one five, German measles half a 
guinea, makes two fifteen six — don't waggle your 
finger — whooping-cough, say fifteen shillings" — 
and so on it went, and it added up differently each 
time, but at last Wendy just got through, with 
mumps reduced to twelve six, and the two kinds 
of measles treated as one. 

There was the same excitement over John, and 
Michael had even a narrower squeak; but both 
were kept, and soon, you might have seen the 
three of them going in a row to Miss Fulsom's 
Kindergarten school, accompanied by their nurse. 

Mrs. Darling loved to have everything just so, 
and Mr. Darling had a passion for being exactly 
like his neighbours; so, of course, they had a nurse. 
As they were poor, owing to the amount of milk 
the children drank, this nurse was a prim New- 
foundland dog, called Nana, who had belonged to 
no one in particular until the Darlings engaged her. 
She had always thought children important, how- 
ever, and the Darlings had become acquainted 
with her in Kensington Gardens, where she spent 
most of her spare time peeping into perambulators, 

4 



PETER BREAKS THROUGH 

and was much hated by careless nursemaids, whom 
she followed to their homes and complained of 
to their mistresses. She proved to be quite a 
treasure of a nurse. How thorough she was at 
bath-time, and up at any moment of the night if 
one of her charges made the slightest cry. Of 
course her kennel was in the nursery. She had a 
genius for knowing when a cough is a thing to 
have no patience with and when it needs stocking 
round your throat. She believed to her last day in 
old-fashioned remedies like rhubarb leaf, and 
made sounds of contempt over all this new-fan- 
gled talk about germs, and so on. It was a lesson 
in propriety to see her escorting the children to 
school, walking sedately by their side when they 
were well behaved, and butting them back into 
line if they strayed. On John's footer days she 
never once forgot his sweater, and she usually car- 
ried an umbrella in her mouth in case of rain. 
There is a room in the basement of Miss Fulsom's 
school where the nurses wait. They sat on forms, 
while Nana lay on the floor, but that was the only 
difference. They affected to ignore her as of an 
inferior social status to themselves, and she de- 
spised their light talk. She resented visits to the 
nursery from Mrs. Darling's friends, but if they did 
come she first whipped off Michael's pinafore and 
puthimintotheonewithbluebraiding,andsmoothed 
out Wendy and made a dash at John's hair. 

5 



PETER AND WENDY 

No nursery could possibly have been con- 
ducted more correctly, and Mr. Darling knew it. 
yet he sometimes wondered uneasily whether the 
neighbours talked. 

He had his position in the city to consider. 

Nana also troubled him in another way. He 
had sometimes a feeling that she did not admire 
him. "I know she admires you tremendously, 
George," Mrs. Darling would assure him, and 
then she would sign to the children to be specially 
nice to father. Lovely dances followed, in which 
the only other servant, Liza, was sometimes al- 
lowed to join. Such a midget she looked in her 
long skirt and maid's cap, though she had sworn, 
when engaged, that she would never see ten again. 
The gaiety of those romps ! And gayest of all was 
Mrs. Darling, who would pirouette so wildly that 
all you could see of her was the kiss, and then if 
you had dashed at her you might have got it. 
There never was a simpler happier family until 
the coming of Peter Pan. 

Mrs. Darling first heard of Peter when she was 
tidying up her children's minds. It is the nightly 
custom of every good mother after her children 
are asleep to rummage in their minds and put 
things straight for next morning, repacking into 
their proper places the many articles that have 
wandered during the day. If you could keep 
awake (but of course you can't) you would see 

6 



PETER BREAKS THROUGH 

your own mother doing this, and you would find 
it very interesting to watch her. It is quite like 
tidying up drawers. You would see her on her 
knees, I expect, lingering humorously over some 
of your contents, wondering where on earth you 
had picked this thing up, making discoveries sweet 
and not so sweet, pressing this to her cheek as if it 
were as nice as a kitten, and hurriedly stowing 
that out of sight. When you wake in the morn- 
ing, the naughtinesses and evil passions with which 
you went to bed have been folded up small and 
placed at the bottom of your mind, and on the 
top, beautifully aired, are spread out your pret- 
tier thoughts, ready for you to put on. 

I don't know whether you have ever seen a map 
of a person's mind. Doctors sometimes draw maps 
of other parts of you, and your own map can be- 
come intensely interesting, but catch them trying 
to draw a map of a child's mind, which is not only 
confused, but keeps going round all the time. 
There are zigzag lines on it, just like your tem- 
perature on a card, and these are probably roads 
in the island, for the Neverland is always more 
or less an island, with astonishing splashes of 
colour here and there, and coral reefs and rakish- 
looking craft in the offing, and savages and lonely 
lairs, and gnomes who are mostly tailors, and 
caves through which a river runs, and princes with 
six elder brothers, and a hut fast going to decay, 

7 - 



PETER AND WENDY 

and one very small old lady with a hooked nose. 
It would be an easy map if that were all, but there 
is also first day at school, religion, fathers, the 
round pond, needle-work, murders, hangings, 
verbs that take the dative, chocolate pudding day, 
getting into braces, say ninety-nine, threepence for 
pulling out your tooth yourself, and so on, and 
either these are part of the island or they are an- 
other map showing through, and it is all rather 
confusing, especially as nothing will stand still. 

Of course the Neverlands vary a good deal. 
John's, for instance, had a lagoon with flamingoes 
flying over it at which John was shooting, while 
Michael, who was very small, had a flamingo with 
lagoons flying over it. John lived in a boat turned 
upside down on the sands, Michael in a wigwam, 
Wendy in a house of leaves deftly sewn together. 
John had no friends, Michael had friends at night, 
Wendy had a pet wolf forsaken by its parents. 
But on the whole the Neverlands have a family 
resemblance, and if they stood still in a row you 
could say of them that they have each other's nose, 
and so forth. On these magic shores children at 
play are for ever beaching their coracles. We too 
have been there; we can still hear the sound of the 
surf, though we shall land no more. 

Of all delectable islands the Neverland is the 
•snuggest and most compact, not large and sprawly, 
you know, with tedious distances between one ad- 

8 



PETER BREAKS THROUGH 

venture and another, but nicely crammed. When 
you play at it by day with the chairs and table- 
cloth, it is not in the least alarming, but in the two 
minutes before you go to sleep it becomes very 
nearly real. That is why there are night-lights. 

Occasionally in her travels through her chil- 
dren's minds Mrs. Darling found things she could 
not understand, and of these quite the most per- 
plexing was the word Peter. She knew of no 
Peter, and yet he was here and there in John and 
Michael's minds, while Wendy's began to be 
scrawled all over with him. The name stood out 
in bolder letters than any of the other words, and 
as Mrs. Darling gazed she felt that it had an oddly 
cocky appearance. 

"Yes, he is rather cocky," Wendy admitted 
with regret. Her mother had been questioning 
hen 

"But who is he, my pet?" 

"He is Peter Pan, you know, mother." 

At first Mrs. Darling did not know, but after 
thinking back into her childhood she just remem- 
bered a Peter Pan who was said to live with the 
fairies. There were odd stories about him, as that 
when children died he went part of the way with 
them, so that they should not be frightened. She 
had believed in him at the time, but now that she 
was married and full of sense she quite doubted 
whether there was any such person. 

9 



PETER AND WENDY 

"Besides," she said to Wendy, "he would be 
grown up by this time." 

"Oh no, he is n't grown up," Wendy assured 
her confidently, "and he is just my size." She 
meant that he was her size in both mind and body; 
she did n't know how she knew it, she just knew it. 

Mrs. Darling consulted Mr. Darling, but he 
smiled pooh-pooh. "Mark my words," he said, 
"it is some nonsense Nana has been putting into 
their heads; just the sort of idea a dog would 
have. Leave it alone, and it will blow over." 

But it would not blow over, and soon the trou- 
blesome boy gave Mrs. Darling quite a shock. 

Children have the strangest adventures with- 
out being troubled by them. For instance, they 
may remember to mention, a week after the event 
happened, that when they were in the wood they 
met their dead father and had a game with him. 
It was in this casual way that Wendy one morn- 
ing made a disquieting revelation. Some leaves 
of a tree had been found on the nursery floor, 
which certainly were not there when the children 
went to bed, and Mrs. Darling was puzzling over 
them when Wendy said with a tolerant smile : 

"I do believe it is that Peter again!" 

"Whatever do you mean, Wendy?" 

"It is so naughty of him not to wipe," Wendy 
said, sighing. She was a tidy child. 

She explained in quite a matter-of-fact way that 
10 



PETER BREAKS THROUGH 

she thought Peter sometimes came to the nursery 
in the night and sat on the foot of her bed and 
played on his pipes to her. Unfortunately she 
never woke, so she did n't know how she knew, 
she just knew. 

"What nonsense you talk, precious! No one 
can get into the house without knocking." 

"I think he comes in by the window," she said. 

"My love, it is three floors up." 

"Were n't the leaves at the foot of the window, 
mother?" 

It was quite true; the leaves had been found 
very near the window. 

Mrs. Darling did not know what to think, for 
it all seemed so natural to Wendy that you could 
not dismiss it by saying she had been dreaming. 

"My child," the mother cried, "why did you 
not tell me of this before?" 

"I forgot," said Wendy lightly. She was in 
a hurry to get her breakfast. 

Oh, surely she must have been dreaming. 

But, on the other hand, there were the leaves. 
Mrs. Darling examined them carefully; they were 
skeleton leaves, but she was sure they did not 
come from any tree that grew in England. She 
crawled about the floor, peering at it with a candle 
for marks of a strange foot. She rattled the poker 
up the chimney and tapped the walls. She let 
down a tape from the window to the pavement, 

1 1 



PETER AND WENDY 

and it was a sheer drop of thirty feet, without so 
much as a spout to climb up by. 

Certainly Wendy had been dreaming. 

But Wendy had not been dreaming, as the very 
next night showed, the night on which the ex- 
traordinary adventures of these children may be 
said to have begun. 

On the night we speak of all the children were 
once more in bed. It happened to be Nana's even- 
ing off, and Mrs. Darling had bathed them and 
sung to them till one by one they had let go her 
hand and slid away into the land of sleep. 

All were looking so safe and cosy that she smiled 
at her fears now and sat down tranquilly by the 
fire to sew. 

It was something for Michael, who on his birth- 
day was getting into shirts. The fire was warm, 
however, and the nursery dimly lit by three night- 
lights, and presently the sewing lay on Mrs. 
Darling's lap. Then her head nodded, oh, so 
gracefully. She was asleep. Look at the four of 
them, Wendy and Michael over there, John here, 
and Mrs. Darling by the fire. There should have 
been a fourth night-light. 

While she slept she had a dream. She dreamt 
that the Neverland had come too near and that a 
strange boy had broken through from it. He did 
not alarm her, for she thought she had seen him 
before in the faces of many women who have no 

12 



PETER BREAKS THROUGH 

children. Perhaps he is to be found in the faces*' 
of some mothers also. But in her dream he had 
rent the film that obscures the Neverland, and she 
saw Wendy and John and Michael peeping, 
through the gap. 

The dream by itself would have been a triflev 
but while she was dreaming the window of the 
nursery blew open, and a boy did drop on the 
floor. He was accompanied by a strange light, no 
bigger than your fist, which darted about the room 
like a living thing, and I think it must have been 
this light that wakened Mrs. Darling. 

She started up with a cry, and saw the boy, and 
somehow she knew at once that he was Peter Pan. 
If you or I or Wendy had been there we should 
have seen that he was very like Mrs. Darling's 
kiss. He was a lovely boy, clad in skeleton leaves 
and the juices that ooze out of trees, but the most 
entrancing thing about him was that he had all his 
first teeth. When he saw she was a grown-up, he 
gnashed the little pearls at her. 



*3 



CHAPTER II 

THE SHADOW 

Mrs. Darling screamed, and, as if in answer to a 
bell, the door opened, and Nana entered, returned 
from her evening out. She growled and sprang at 
the boy, who leapt lightly through the window. 
Again Mrs. Darling screamed, this time in distress 
for him, for she thought he was killed, and she ran 
down into the street to look for his little body, but 
it was not there; and she looked up, and in the 
black night she could see nothing but what she 
thought was a shooting star. 

She returned to the nursery, and found Nana 
with something in her mouth, which proved to be 
the boy's shadow. As he leapt at the window 
Nana had closed it quickly, too late to catch him, 
but his shadow had not had time to get out; slam 
went the window and snapped it off. 

You may be sure Mrs. Darling examined the 
shadow carefully, but it was quite the ordinary 
kind. 

Nana had no doubt of what was the best thing 

H 



THE SHADOW 

to do with this shadow. She hung it out at the 
window, meaning "He is sure to come back for it; 
let us put it where he can get it easily without dis- 
turbing the children." 

But unfortunately Mrs. Darling could not leave 
it hanging out at the window, it looked so like the 
washing and lowered the whole tone of the house. 
She thought of showing it to Mr. Darling, but he 
was totting up winter great-coats for John and 
Michael, with a wet towel round his head to keep 
his brain clear, and it seemed a shame to trouble 
him ; besides, she knew exactly what he would say : 
"It all comes of having a dog for a nurse." 

She decided to roll the shadow up and put it 
away carefully in a drawer, until a fitting oppor- 
tunity came for telling her husband. Ah me ! 

The opportunity came a week later, on that 
never-to-be-forgotten Friday. Of course it was 
a Friday. 

"I ought to have been specially careful on a 
Friday," she used to say afterwards to her hus- 
band, while perhaps Nana was on the other side 
of her, holding her hand. 

"No, no," Mr. Darling always said, "I am re- 
sponsible for it all. I, George Darling, did it. 
Mea culpa, mea culpa" He had had a classical 
education. 

They sat thus night after night recalling that 
fatal Friday, till every detail of it was stamped on 

15 



PETER AND WENDY 

their brains and came through on the other side 
like the faces on a bad coinage. 

"If only I had not accepted that invitation to 
dine at 27," Mrs. Darling said. 

"If only I had not poured my medicine into 
Nana's bowl," said Mr. Darling. 

"If only I had pretended to like the medicine, 53 
was what Nana's wet eyes said. 

"My liking for parties, George." 

"My fatal gift of humour, dearest." 

"My touchiness about trifles, dear master and 
mistress." 

Then one or more of them would break down 
altogether; Nana at the thought, "It 's true, it 's 
true, they ought not to have had a dog for a 
nurse." Many a time it was Mr. Darling who put 
the handkerchief to Nana's eyes. 

"That fiend!" Mr. Darling would cry, and 
Nana's bark was the echo of it, but Mrs. Darling 
never upbraided Peter; there was something in the 
right-hand corner of her mouth that wanted her 
not to call Peter names. 

They would sit there in the empty nursery, re- 
calling fondly every smallest detail of that dread- 
ful evening. It had begun so uneventfully, so 
precisely like a hundred other evenings, with Nana 
putting on the water for Michael's bath and carry- 
ing him to it on her back. 

"I won't go to bed," he had shouted, like one 
16 



THE SHADOW 

who still believed that he had the last word on 
the subject, "I won't, I won't. Nana, it is n't six 
o'clock yet. Oh dear, oh dear, I sha'n't love you 
any more, Nana. I tell you I won't be bathed, I 
won't, I won't!" 

Then Mrs. Darling had come in, wearing her 
white evening-gown. She had dressed early be- 
cause Wendy so loved to see her in her evening- 
gown, with the necklace George had given her. 
She was wearing Wendy's bracelet on her arm; 
she had asked for the loan of it. Wendy so loved 
to lend her bracelet to her mother. 

She had found her two older children playing 
at being herself and father on the occasion of 
Wendy's birth, and John was saying: 

<£ I am happy to inform you, Mrs. Darling, that 
you are now a mother," in just such a tone as Mr. 
Darling himself may have used on the real occa- 
sion. 

Wendy had danced with joy, just as the real 
Mrs. Darling must have done. 

Then John was born, with the extra pomp that 
he conceived due to the birth of a male, and 
Michael came from his bath to ask to be born also, 
but John said brutally that they did not want any 
more. 

Michael had nearly cried. "Nobody wants 
me," he said, and of course the lady in evening- 
dress could not stand that. 

17 



PETER AND WENDY 

"I do," she said, "I so want a third child." 

"Boy or girl?" asked Michael, not too hope- 
fully. 

"Boy." 

Then he had leapt into her arms. Such a little 
thing for Mr. and Mrs. Darling and Nana to re- 
call now, but not so little if that was to be Mi- 
chael's last night in the nursery. 

They go on with their recollections. 

"It was then that I rushed in like a tornado, 
wasn't it?" Mr. Darling would say, scorning him- 
self; and indeed he had been like a tornado. 

Perhaps there was some excuse for him. He, 
too, had been dressing for the party, and all had 
gone well with him until he came to his tie. It is 
an astounding thing to have to tell, but this man, 
though he knew about stocks and shares, had no 
real mastery of his tie. Sometimes the thing 
yielded to him without a contest, but there were 
occasions when it would have been better for the 
house if he had swallowed his pride and used a 
made-up tie. 

This was such an occasion. He came rushing 
into the nursery with the crumpled little brute of 
a tie in his hand. 

"Why, what is the matter, father dear?" 

"Matter!" he yelled; he really yelled. "This 
tie, it will not tie." He became dangerously sar- 

18 



THE SHADOW 

castic. "Not round my neck! Round the bed- 
post! Oh yes, twenty times have I made it up 
round the bed-post, but round my neck, no ! Oh 
dear no ! begs to be excused !" 

He thought Mrs. Darling was not sufficiently 
impressed, and he went on sternly, "I warn you 
of this, mother, that unless this tie is round my 
neck we don't go out to dinner to-night, and if I 
don't go out to dinner to-night, I never go to the 
office again, and if I don't go to the office again, 
you and I starve, and our children will be flung 
into the streets." 

Even then Mrs. Darling was placid. "Let me 
try, dear," she said, and indeed that was what he 
had come to ask her to do, and with her nice cool 
hands she tied his tie for him, while the children 
stood around to see their fate decided. Some men 
would have resented her being able to do it so 
easily, but Mr. Darling was far too fine a nature 
for that; he thanked her carelessly, at once forgot 
his rage, and in another moment was dancing 
round the room with Michael on his back. 

"How wildly we romped!" says Mrs. Darling 
now, recalling it. 

"Our last romp !" Mr. Darling groaned. 

"O George, do you remember Michael sud- 
denly said to me, 'How did you get to know me, 
mother?' " 

19 



PETER AND WENDY 

"I remember!" 

"They were rather sweet, don't you think, 
George?" 

"And they were ours, ours! and now they are 
gone." 

The romp had ended with the appearance of 
Nana, and most unluckily Mr. Darling collided 
against her, covering his trousers with hairs. They 
were not only new trousers, but they were the first 
he had ever had with braid on them, and he had 
to bite his lip to prevent the tears coming. Of 
course Mrs. Darling brushed him, but he began to 
talk again about its being a mistake to have a dog 
for a nurse. 

"George, Nana is a treasure." 

"No doubt, but I have an uneasy feeling at 
times that she looks upon the children as puppies." 

"Oh no, dear one, I feel sure she knows they 
have souls." 

"I wonder," Mr. Darling said thoughtfully, "I 
wonder." It was an opportunity, his -wife felt, for 
telling him about the boy. At first he pooh-poohed 
the story, but he became thoughtful when she 
showed him the shadow. 

"It is nobody I know," he said, examining it 
carefully, "but he does look a scoundrel." 

"We were still discussing it, you remember," 
says Mr. Darling, "when Nana came in with 
Michael's medicine. You will never carry the 

20 



THE SHADOW 

bottle in your mouth again, Nana, and it is all my 
fault." 

Strong man though he was, there is no doubt that 
he had behaved rather foolishly over the medicine. 
If he had a weakness, it was for thinking that all 
his life he had taken medicine boldly, and so now, 
when Michael dodged the spoon in Nana's mouth, 
he had said reprovingly, "Be a man, Michael." 

"Won't; won't!" Michael cried naughtily. 
Mrs. Darling left the room to get a chocolate for 
him, and Mr. Darling thought this showed want 
of firmness. 

"Mother, don't pamper him," he called after 
her. "Michael, when I was your age I took medi- 
cine without a murmur. I said 'Thank you, kind 
parents, for giving me bottles to make me well.' " 

He really thought this was true, and Wendy, 
who was now in her night-gown, believed it also, 
and she said, to encourage Michael, "That medi- 
cine you sometimes take, father, is much nastier, 
isn't it?" 

"Ever so much nastier," Mr. Darling said 
bravely, "and I would take it now as an example 
to you, Michael, if I hadn't lost the bottle." 

He had not exactly lost it; he had climbed in 
the dead of night to the top of the wardrobe and 
hidden it there. What he did not know was that 
the faithful Liza had found it, and put it back on 
his wash-stand. 



PETER AND WENDY 

"I know where it is, father," Wendy cried, al- 
ways glad to be of service. "I'll bring it," and 
she was off before he could stop her. Immediately 
his spirits sank in the strangest way. 

"John," he said, shuddering, "it's most beastly 
stuff. It's that nasty, sticky, sweet kind." 

"It will soon be over, father," John said cheer- 
ily, and then in rushed Wendy with the medicine 
in a glass. 

"I have been as quick as I could," she panted. 

"You have been wonderfully quick," her father 
retorted, with a vindictive politeness that was 
quite thrown away upon her. "Michael first," he 
said doggedly. 

"Father first," said Michael, who was of a sus- 
picious nature. 

"I shall be sick, you know," Mr. Darling said 
threateningly. 

"Come on, father," said John. 

"Hold your tongue, John," his father rapped 
out. 

Wendy was quite puzzled. "I thought you 
took it quite easily, father." 

"That is not the point," he retorted. "The 
point is, that there is more in my glass than in 
Michael's spoon." His proud heart was nearly 
bursting. "And it isn't fair; I would say it though 
it were with my last breath; it isn't fair." 

"Father, I am waiting," said Michael coldly. 
22 



THE SHADOW 

"It's all very well to say you are waiting; so am 
I waiting." 

"Father's a cowardy custard." 

"So are you a cowardy custard." 

"I'm not frightened." 

"Neither am I frightened." 

"Well, then, take it." 

"Well, then, you take it." 

Wendy had a splendid idea. "Why not both 
take it at the same time ?" 

"Certainly," said Mr. Darling. "Are you 
ready, Michael?" 

Wendy gave the words, one, two, three, and 
Michael took his medicine, but Mr. Darling 
slipped his behind his back. 

There was a yell of rage from Michael, and 
"O father!" Wendy exclaimed. 

"What do you mean by 'O father'?" Mr. 
Darling demanded. "Stop that row, Michael. I 
meant to take mine, but I — I missed it." 

It was dreadful the way all the three were look- 
ing at him, just as if they did not admire him. 
"Look here, all of you," he said entreatingly, as 
soon as Nana had gone into the bathroom, "I have 
just thought of a splendid joke. I shall pour my 
medicine into Nana's bowl, and she will drink it, 
thinking it is milk !" 

It was the colour of milk; but the children did 
not have their father's sense of humour, and they 

23 



PETER AND WENDY 

looked at him reproachfully as he poured the medi- 
cine into Nana's bowl. "What fun!" he said 
doubtfully, and they did not dare expose him when 
Mrs. Darling and Nana returned. 

"Nana, good dog," he said, patting her, "I have 
put a little milk into your bowl, Nana." 

Nana wagged her tail, ran to the medicine, and 
began lapping it. Then she gave Mr. Darling 
such a look, not an angry look: she showed him 
the great red tear that makes us so sorry for noble 
dogs, and crept into her kennel. 

Mr. Darling was frightfully ashamed of him- 
self, but he would not give in. In a horrid silence 
Mrs. Darling smelt the bowl. "O George," she 
said, "it's your medicine !" 

"It was only a joke," he roared, while she com- 
forted her boys, and Wendy hugged Nana. 
"Much good," he said bitterly, "my wearing my- 
self to the bone trying to be funny in this house." 

And still Wendy hugged Nana. "That's right," 
he shouted. "Coddle her! Nobody coddles me. 
Oh dear no! I am only the breadwinner, why 
should I be coddled — why, why, why!" 

"George," Mrs. Darling entreated him, "not so 
loud; the servants will hear you." Somehow they 
had got into the way of calling Liza the servants. 

"Let them!" he answered recklessly. "Bring 
in the whole world. But I refuse to allow that 
dog to lord it in my nursery for an hour longer." 

24 



THE SHADOW 

The children wept, and Nana ran to him be- 
seechingly, but he waved her back. He felt he 
was a strong man again. "In vain, in vain," he 
cried; "the proper place for you is the yard, and 
there you go to be tied up this instant." 

"George, George," Mrs. Darling whispered, 
"remember what I told you about that boy." 

Alas, he would not listen. He was determined 
to show who was master in that house, and when 
commands would not draw Nana from the kennel, 
he lured her out of it with honeyed words, and 
seizing her roughly, dragged her from the nursery. 
He was ashamed of himself, and yet he did it. It 
was all owing to his too affectionate nature, which 
craved for admiration. When he had tied her up 
in the back-yard, the wretched father went and sat 
in the passage, with his knuckles to his eyes. 

In the meantime Mrs. Darling had put the chil- 
dren to bed in unwonted silence and lit their night- 
lights. They could hear Nana barking, and John 
whimpered, "It is because he is chaining her up in 
the yard," but Wendy was wiser. 

"That is not Nana's unhappy bark," she said, 
little guessing what was about to happen; "that is 
her bark when she smells danger." 

Danger ! 

"Are you sure, Wendy?" 

"Oh yes." 

Mrs. Darling quivered and went to the win- 

25 



PETER AND WENDY 

dow. It was securely fastened. She looked out> 
and the night was peppered with stars. They 
were crowding round the house, as if curious to 
see what was to take place there, but she did not 
notice this, nor that one or two of the smaller ones 
winked at her. Yet a nameless fear clutched at 
her heart and made her cry, "Oh, how I wish that 
I wasn't going to a party to-night!" 

Even Michael, already half asleep, knew that 
she was perturbed, and he asked, "Can anything 
harm us, mother, after the night-lights are lit?" 

"Nothing, precious," she said; "they are the 
eyes a mother leaves behind her to guard her chil- 
dren." 

She went from bed to bed singing enchantments 
over them, and little Michael flung his arms 
round her. "Mother," he cried, "I'm glad of 
you." They were the last words she was to hear 
from him for a long time. 

No. 27 was only a few yards distant, but there 
had been a slight fall of snow, and Father and 
Mother Darling picked their way over it deftly 
not to soil their shoes. They were already the 
only persons in the street, and all the stars were 
watching them. Stars are beautiful, but they may 
not take an active part in anything, they must just 
look on for ever. It is a punishment put on them 
for something they did so long ago that no star 
now knows what it was. So the older ones have 

26 



THE SHADOW 

become glassy-eyed and seldom speak (winking 
is the star language), but the little ones still won- 
der. They are not really friendly to Peter, who 
has a mischievous way of stealing up behind them 
and trying to blow them out ; but they are so fond 
of fun that they were on his side to-night, and 
anxious to get the grown-ups out of the way. So 
as soon as the door of 27 closed on Mr. and Mrs. 
Darling there was a commotion in the firmament, 
and the smallest of all the stars in the Milky Way 
screamed out : 
"Now, Peter!" 



27 



CHAPTER III 

COME AWAY, COME AWAY ! 

For a moment after Mr. and Mrs. Darling left 
the house the night-lights by the beds of the three 
children continued to burn clearly. They were 
awfully nice little night-lights, and one cannot 
help wishing that they could have kept awake to 
see Peter; but Wendy's light blinked and gave 
such a yawn that the other two yawned also, and 
before they could close their mouths all the three 
went out. 

There was another light in the room now, a 
thousand times brighter than the night-lights, and 
in the time we have taken to say this, it has been 
in all the drawers in the nursery, looking for 
Peter's shadow, rummaged the wardrobe and 
turned every pocket inside out. It was not really 
a light; it made this light by flashing about so 
quickly, but when it came to rest for a second you 
saw it was a fairy, no longer than your hand, but 
still growing. It was a girl called Tinker Bell 
exquisitely gowned in a skeleton leaf, cut low and 

28 



COME AWAY, COME AWAY! 

square, through which her figure could be seen to 
the best advantage. She was slightly inclined to 
embonpoint. 

A moment after the fairy's entrance the window 
was blown open by the breathing of the little 
stars, and Peter dropped in. He had carried 
Tinker Bell part of the way, and his hand was 
still messy with the fairy dust. 

'Tinker Bell," he called softly, after making 
sure that the children were asleep. "Tink, where 
are you?" She was in a jug for the moment, and 
liking it extremely; she had never been in a jug 
before. 

"Oh, do come out of that jug, and tell me, do 
you know where they put my shadow?" 

The loveliest tinkle as of golden bells answered 
him. It is the fairy language. You ordinary chil- 
dren can never hear it, but if you were to hear it 
you would know that you had heard it once before. 

Tink said that the shadow was in the big box. 
She meant the chest of drawers, and Peter jumped 
at the drawers, scattering their contents to the 
floor with both hands, as kings toss ha'pence to 
the crowd. In a moment he had recovered his 
shadow, and in his delight he forgot that he had 
shut Tinker Bell up in the drawer. 

If he thought at all, but I don't believe he ever 
thought, it was that he and his shadow, when 
brought near each other, would join like drops of 

29 



PETER AND WENDY 

water, and when they did not he was appalled. 
He tried to stick it on with soap from the bath- 
room, but that also failed. A shudder passed 
through Peter, and he sat on the floor and cried. 

His sobs woke Wendy, and she sat up in bed. 
She was not alarmed to see a stranger crying on 
the nursery floor; she was only pleasantly inter- 
ested. 

"Boy," she said courteously, "why are you 
crying?" 

Peter could be exceedingly polite also, having 
learned the grand manner at fairy ceremonies, and 
he rose and bowed to her beautifully. She was 
much pleased, and bowed beautifully to him from 
the bed. 

"What's your name?" he asked. 

"Wendy Moira Angela Darling," she replied 
with some satisfaction. "What is your name?" 

"Peter Pan." 

She was already sure that he must be Peter, but 
it did seem a comparatively short name. 

"Is that all?" 

"Yes," he said rather sharply. He felt for the 
first time that it was a shortish name. 

"I'm so sorry," said Wendy Moira Angela. 

"It doesn't matter," Peter gulped. 

She asked where he lived. 

"Second to the right," said Peter, "and then 
straight on till morning." 

SO 



COME AWAY, COME AWAY! 

"What a funny address !" 

Peter had a sinking. For the first time he felt 
that perhaps it was a funny address. 

"No, it isn't," he said. 

"I mean," Wendy said nicely, remembering that 
she was hostess, "is that what they put on the let- 
ters?" 

He wished she had not mentioned letters. 

"Don't get any letters," he said contemptu- 
ously. 

"But your mother gets letters?" 

"Don't have a mother," he said. Not only had 
he no mother, but he had not the slightest desire to 
have one. He thought them very over-rated per- 
sons. Wendy, however, felt at once that she was 
in the presence of a tragedy. 

"O Peter, no wonder you were crying," she said, 
and got out of bed and ran to him. 

"I wasn't crying about mothers," he said rather 
indignantly. "I was crying because I can't get my 
shadow to stick on. Besides, I wasn't crying." 

"It has come off?" 

"Yes." 

Then Wendy saw the shadow on the floor, look- 
ing so draggled, and she was frightfully sorry for 
Peter. "How awful !" she said, but she could not 
help smiling when she saw that he had been trying 
to stick it on with soap. How exactly like a boy ! 

Fortunately she knew at once what to do. "It 

31 



PETER AND WENDY 

must be sewn on," she said, just a little patron- 
isingly. 

"What's sewn?" he asked. 

"You're dreadfully ignorant." 

"No, I'm not." 

But she was exulting in his ignorance. "I shall 
sew it on for you, my little man," she said, though 
he was as tall as herself, and she got out her house- 
wife, and sewed the shadow on to Peter's foot. 

"I daresay it will hurt a little," she warned 
him. 

"Oh, I sha'n't cry," said Peter, who was already 
of opinion that he had never cried in his life. 
And he clenched his teeth and did not cry, and 
soon his shadow was behaving properly, though 
still a little creased. 

"Perhaps I should have ironed it," Wendy said 
thoughtfully, but Peter, boylike, was indifferent 
to appearances, and he was now jumping about in 
the wildest glee. Alas, he had already forgotten 
that he owed his bliss to Wendy. He thought he 
had attached the shadow himself. "How clever I 
am!" he crowed rapturously, "oh, the cleverness 
of me!" 

It is humiliating to have to confess that this 
conceit of Peter was one of his most fascinating 
qualities. To put it with brutal frankness, there 
never was a cockier boy. 

But for the moment Wendy was shocked. 

3^ 



COME AWAY, COME AWAY! 

"You conceit," she exclaimed, with frightful sar- 
casm; "of course I did nothing!" 

"You did a little," Peter said carelessly, and 
continued to dance. 

"A little !" she replied with hauteur. "If I am 
no use I can at least withdraw," and she sprang in 
the most dignified way into bed and covered her 
face with the blankets. 

To induce her to look up he pretended to be 
going away, and when this failed he sat on the end 
of the bed and tapped her gently with his foot. 
"Wendy," he said, "don't withdraw. I can't help 
crowing, Wendy, when I'm pleased with myself." 
Still she would not look up, though she was listen- 
ing eagerly. "Wendy," he continued, in a voice 
that no woman has ever yet been able to resist, 
"Wendy, one girl is more use than twenty 
boys." ' 

Now Wendy was every inch a woman, though 
there were not very many inches, and she peeped 
out of the bed-clothes. 

"Do you really think so, Peter?" 

"Yes, I do." ' 

"I think it's perfectly sweet of you," she de- 
clared, "and I'll get up again," and she sat with 
him on the side of the bed. She also said she 
would give him a kiss if he liked, but Peter did 
not know what she meant, and he held out his 
hand expectantly. 

33 



PETER AND WENDY 

"Surely you know what a kiss is?" she asked, 
aghast. 

"I shall know when you give it to me," he re- 
plied stiffly, and not to hurt his feelings she gave 
him a thimble. 

"Now," said he, "shall I give you a kiss?" and 
she replied with a slight primness, "If you please." 
She made herself rather cheap by inclining her 
face toward him, but he merely dropped an acorn 
button into her hand, so she slowly returned her 
face to where it had been before, and said nicely 
that she would wear his kiss on the chain round 
her neck. It was lucky that she did put it on that 
chain, for it was afterwards to save her life. 

When people in our set are introduced, it is cus- 
tomary for them to ask each other's age, and so 
Wendy, who always liked to do the correct thing, 
asked Peter how old he was. It was not really 
a happy question to ask him; it was like an exami- 
nation paper that asks grammar, when what you 
want to be asked is Kings of England. 

"I don't know," he replied uneasily, "but I am 
quite young." He really knew nothing about it, 
he had merely suspicions, but he said at a venture, 
"Wendy, I ran away the day I was born." 

Wendy was quite surprised, but interested; and 
she indicated in the charming drawing-room man- 
ner, by a touch on her night-gown, that he could 
sit nearer her. 

34 



COME AWAY, COME AWAY! 

"It was because I heard father and mother/' he 
explained in a low voice, "talking about what I 
was to be when I became a man." He was ex- 
traordinarily agitated now. "I don't want ever to 
be a man," he said with passion. "I want always 
to be a little boy and to have fun. So I ran away 
to Kensington Gardens and lived a long long time 
among the fairies." 

She gave him a look of the most intense admira- 
tion, and he thought it was because he had run 
away, but it was really because he knew fairies. 
Wendy had lived such a home life that to know 
fairies struck her as quite delightful. She poured 
out questions about them, to his surprise, for they 
were rather a nuisance to him, getting in his way 
and so on, and indeed he sometimes had to give 
them a hiding. Still, he liked them on the whole, 
and he told her about the beginning of fairies. 

"You see, Wendy, when the first baby laughed 
for the first time, its laugh broke into a thousand 
pieces, and they all went skipping about, and that 
was the beginning of fairies." 

Tedious talk this, but being a stay-at-home she 
liked it. 

"And so," he went on good-naturedly, "there 
ought to be one fairy for every boy and girl." 

"Ought to be ? Isn't there ?" 

"No. You see children know such a lot now, 
they soon don't believe in fairies, and every time 

35 



PETER AND WENDY 

a child says, T don't believe in fairies,' there is a 
fairy somewhere that falls down dead." 

Really, he thought they had now talked enough 
about fairies, and it struck him that Tinker Bell 
was keeping very quiet. "I can't think where she 
has gone to," he said, rising, and he called Tink by 
name. Wendy's heart went flutter with a sudden 
thrill. 

"Peter," she cried, clutching him, "you don't 
mean to tell me that there is a fairy in this room !" 

"She was here just now," he said a little im- 
patiently. "You don't hear her, do you?" and 
they both listened. 

"The only sound I hear," said Wendy, "is like a 
tinkle of bells." 

"Well, that's Tink, that's the fairy language. 
I think I hear her too." 

The sound came from the chest of drawers, and 
Peter made a merry face. No one could ever look 
quite so merry as Peter, and the loveliest of gur- 
gles was his laugh. He had his first laugh still. 

"Wendy," he whispered gleefully, "I do believe 
I shut her up in the drawer!" 

He let poor Tink out of the drawer, and she 
flew about the nursery screaming with fury. "You 
shouldn't say such things," Peter retorted. "Of 
course I'm very sorry, but how could I know you 
were in the drawer?" 

Wendy was not listening to him. "O Peter," 

36 



COME AWAY, COME AWAY! 

she cried, "if she would only stand still and let me 
see her!" 

"They hardly ever stand still," he said, but for 
one moment Wendy saw the romantic figure come 
to rest on the cuckoo clock. "O the lovely!" she 
cried, though Tink's face was still distorted with 
passion. 

"Tink," said Peter amiably, "this lady says she 
wishes you were her fairy." 

Tinker Bell answered insolently. 

"What does she say, Peter?" 

He had to translate. "She is not very polite. 
She says you are a great ugly girl, and that she is 
my fairy." 

He tried to argue with Tink. "You know you 
can't be my fairy, Tink, because I am a gentleman 
and you are a lady." 

To this Tink replied in these words, "You silly 
ass," and disappeared into the bathroom. "She is 
quite a common fairy," Peter explained apolo- 
getically, "she is called Tinker Bell because she 
mends the pots and kettles." 

They were together in the armchair by this time, 
and Wendy plied him with more questions. 

"If you don't live in Kensington Gardens 
now " 

"Sometimes I do still." 

"But where do you live mostly now?" 

"With the lost boys." 

37 



PETER AND WENDY 

"Who are they? 75 

"They are the children who fall out of their 
perambulators when the nurse is looking the other 
way. If they are not claimed in seven days they 
are sent far away to the Neverland to defray ex- 
penses. I'm captain." 

"What fun it must be !" 

"Yes," said cunning Peter, "but we are rather 
lonely. You see we have no female companion- 
ship." 

"Are none of the others girls?" 

"Oh no; girls, you know, are much too clever to 
fall out of their prams." 

This flattered Wendy immensely. "I think," 
she said, "it is perfectly lovely the way you talk 
about girls; John there just despises us." 

For reply Peter rose and kicked John out of 
bed, blankets and all; one kick. This seemed td 
Wendy rather forward for a first meeting, and she 
told him with spirit that he was not captain in her 
house. However, John continued to sleep so 
placidly on the floor that she allowed him to re- 
main there. "And I know you meant to be 
kind," she said, relenting, "so you may give me a 
kiss." 

For the moment she had forgotten his igno- 
rance about kisses. "I thought you would want it 
back," he said a little bitterly, and offered to re- 
turn her the thimble. 

38 



COME AWAY, COME AWAY! 

"Oh dear/' said the nice Wendy, "I don't mean 
a kiss, I mean a thimble." 

"What's that?" 

"It's like this." She kissed him. 

"Funny!" said Peter gravely. "Now shall I 
give you a thimble?" 

"If you wish to," said Wendy, keeping her head 
erect this time. 

Peter thimbled her, and almost immediately she 
screeched. "What is it, Wendy?" 

"It was exactly as if some one were pulling my 
hair." 

"That must have been Tink. I never knew her 
so naughty before." 

And indeed Tink was darting about again, using 
offensive language. 

"She says she will do that to you, Wendy, every 
time I give you a thimble." 

"But why?" 

"Why, Tink?" 

Again Tink replied, "You silly ass." Peter 
could not understand why, but Wendy under- 
stood, and she was just slightly disappointed when 
he admitted that he came to the nursery window 
not to see her but to listen to stories. 

"You see I don't know any stories. None of 
the lost boys know any stories." 

"How perfectly awful," Wendy said. 

"Do you know," Peter asked, "why swallows 

39 



PETER AND WENDY 

build in the eaves of houses? It is to listen to the 
stories. O Wendy, your mother was telling you 
such a lovely story." 

"Which story was it?" 

"About the prince who couldn't find the lady 
who wore the glass slipper." 

"Peter," said Wendy excitedly, "that was 
Cinderella, and he found her, and they lived 
happy ever after." 

Peter was so glad that he rose from the floor, 
where they had been sitting, and hurried to the 
window. "Where are you going?" she cried with 
misgiving. 

"To tell the other boys." 

"Don't go, Peter," she entreated, "I know such 
lots of stories." 

Those were her precise words, so there can be 
no denying that it was she who first tempted 
him. 

He came back, and there was a greedy look in 
his eyes now which ought to have alarmed her, 
but did not. 

"Oh, the stories I could tell to the boys!" she 
cried, and then Peter gripped her and began to 
draw her toward the window. 

"Let me go !" she ordered him. 

"Wendy, do come with me and tell the other 
boys." 

Of course she was very pleased to be asked, but 
40 



COME AWAY, COME AWAY! 

she said, "Oh dear, I can't. Think of mummy! 
Besides, I can't fly." 

"I'll teach you." 

"Oh, how lovely to fly." 

"I'll teach you how to jump on the wind's back, 
and then away we go." 

"Oo!" she exclaimed rapturously. 

"Wendy, Wendy, when you are sleeping in 
your silly bed you might be flying about with me 
saying funny things to the stars." 

"Oo!" 

"And, Wendy, there are mermaids." 

"Mermaids! With tails?" 

"Such long tails." 

"Oh," cried Wendy, "to see a mermaid!" 

He had become frightfully cunning. "Wendy," 
he said, "how we should all respect you." 

She was wriggling her body in distress. It was 
quite as if she were trying to remain on the nurs- 
ery floor. 

But he had no pity for her. 

"Wendy," he said, the sly one, "you could tuck 
us in at night." 

"Oo!" 

"None of us has ever been tucked in at night." 

"Oo," and her arms went out to him. 

"And you could darn our clothes, and make 
pockets for us. None of us has any pockets." 

How could she resist. "Of course it's awfully 

41 



PETER AND WENDY 

fascinating!" she cried. "Peter, would you teach 
John and Michael to fly too?" 

"If you like," he said indifferently, and she ran 
to John and Michael and shook them. "Wake 
up," she cried, "Peter Pan has come and he is to 
teach us to fly." 

John rubbed his eyes. "Then I shall get up," 
he said. Of course he was on the floor already. 
"Hallo," he said, "I am up!" 

Michael was up by this time also, looking as 
sharp as a knife with six blades and a saw, but 
Peter suddenly signed silence. Their faces as- 
sumed the awful craftiness of children listening 
for sounds from the grown-up world. All was as 
still as salt. Then everything was right. No, 
stop! Everything was wrong. Nana, who had 
been barking distressfully all the evening, was 
quiet now. It was her silence they had heard ! 

"Out with the light! Hide! Quick!" cried 
John, taking command for the only time through- 
out the whole adventure. And thus when Liza 
entered, holding Nana, the nursery seemed quite 
its old self, very dark, and you could have sworn 
you heard its three wicked inmates breathing an- 
gelically as they slept. They were really doing it 
artfully from behind the window curtains. 

Liza was in a bad temper, for she was mixing 
the Christmas puddings in the kitchen, and had 
been drawn away from them, with a raisin still on 

42 



COME AWAY, COME AWAY! 

her cheek, by Nana's absurd suspicions. She 
thought the best way of getting a little quiet was 
to take Nana to the nursery for a moment, but in 
custody of course. 

"There, you suspicious brute," she said, not 
sorry that Nana was in disgrace. "They are per- 
fectly safe, aren't they? Every one of the little 
angels sound asleep in bed. Listen to their gentle 
breathing." 

Here Michael, encouraged by his success, 
breathed so loudly that they were nearly detected. 
Nana knew that kind of breathing, and she tried 
to drag herself out of Liza's clutches. 

But Liza was dense. "No more of it, Nana," 
she said sternly, pulling her out of the room. "I 
warn you if you bark again I shall go straight for 
master and missus and bring them home from the 
party, and then, oh, won't master whip you, just." 

She tied the unhappy dog up again, but do you 
think Nana ceased to bark? Bring master and 
missus home from the party? Why, that was just 
what she wanted. Do you think she cared whether 
she was whipped so long as her charges were safe ? 
Unfortunately Liza returned to her puddings, and 
Nana, seeing that no help would come from her, 
strained and strained at the chain until at last she 
broke it. In another moment she had burst into 
the dining-room of 27 and flung up her paws to 
heaven, her most expressive way of making a com- 

43 



PETER AND WENDY 

munication. Mr. and Mrs. Darling knew at once 
that something terrible was happening in their 
nursery, and without a good-bye to their hostess 
they rushed into the street. 

But it was now ten minutes since three scoun- 
drels had been breathing behind the curtains, and 
Peter Pan can do a great deal in ten minutes. 

We now return to the nursery. 

"It's all right," John announced, emerging 
from his hiding-place. "I say, Peter, can you 
really fly?" 

Instead of troubling to answer him Peter flew 
round the room, taking the mantelpiece on the 
way. 

"How topping!" said John and Michael. 

"How sweet!" cried Wendy. 

"Yes, I'm sweet, oh, I am sweet!" said Peter, 
forgetting his manners again. 

It looked delightfully easy, and they tried it 
first from the floor and then from the beds, but 
they always went down instead of up. 

"I say, how do you do it?" asked John, rubbing 
his knee. He was quite a practical boy. 

"You just think lovely wonderful thoughts," 
Peter explained, "and they lift you up in the air." 

He showed them again. 

"You're so nippy at it," John said, "couldn't 
you do it very slowly once?" 

Peter did it both slowly and quickly. "I've got 

44 



COME AWAY, COME AWAY! 

it now, Wendy!" cried John, but soon he found 
he had not. Not one of them could fly an inch, 
though even Michael was in words of two syl- 
lables, and Peter did not know A from Z. 

Of course Peter had been trifling with them, for 
no one can fly unless the fairy dust has been blown 
on him. Fortunately, as we have mentioned, one 
of his hands was messy with it, and he blew some 
on each of them, with the most superb results. 

"Now just wriggle your shoulders this way," 
he said, "and let go/' 

They were all on their beds, and gallant Mi- 
chael let go first. He did not quite mean to let go, 
but he did it, and immediately he was borne 
across the room. 

"I flewed!" he screamed while still in mid-air. 
John let go and met Wendy near the bath- 
room. 

"Oh, lovely! 3 ' 

"Oh, ripping!" 

"Look at me !" 

"Look at me !" 

"Look at me !" 

They were not nearly so elegant as Peter, they 
could not help kicking a little, but their heads 
were bobbing against the ceiling, and there is al- 
most nothing so delicious as that. Peter gave 
Wendy a hand at first, but had to desist, Tink was 
so indignant. 

45 



PETER AND WENDY 

Up and down they went, and round and round. 
Heavenly was Wendy's word. 

"I say," cried John, "why shouldn't we all go 
out!" 

Of course it was to this that Peter had been 
luring them. 

Michael was ready : he wanted to see how long 
it took him to do a billion miles. But Wendy 
hesitated. 

"Mermaids !" said Peter again. 

"Oo!" 

"And there are pirates." 

"Pirates," cried John, seizing his Sunday hat, 
"let us go at once!" 

It was just at this moment that Mr. and Mrs. 
Darling hurried with Nana out of 27. They ran 
into the middle of the street to look up at the 
nursery window; and, yes, it was still shut, but the 
room was ablaze with light, and most heart-grip- 
ping sight of all, they could see in shadow on the 
curtain three little figures in night attire circling 
round and round, not on the floor but in the air. 

Not three figures, four ! 

In a tremble they opened the street door. Mr. 
Darling would have rushed upstairs, but Mrs. 
Darling signed to him to go softly. She even tried 
to make her heart go softly. 

Will they reach the nursery in time ? If so, how 
delightful for them, and we shall all breathe a 

46 




'^MS^fkJ&MM^^^^^^m 



THE BIRDS WERE FLOWN 



COME AWAY, COME AWAY! 

sigh of relief, but there will be no story. On the 
other hand, if they are not in time, I solemnly 
promise that it will all come right in the end. 

They would have reached the nursery in time 
had it not been that the little stars were watch- 
ing them. Once again the stars blew the window 
open, and that smallest star of all called out : 

"Cave, Peter!" 

Peter knew that there was not a moment to 
lose. "Come," he cried imperiously, and soared 
out at once into the night, followed by John and 
Michael and Wendy. 

Mr. and Mrs. Darling and Nana rushed into 
the nursery too late. The birds were flown. 



47 



CHAPTER IV 

THE FLIGHT 

"Second to the right, and straight on till morn- 
ing." 

That, Peter had told Wendy, was the way to 
the Neverland; but even birds, carrying maps and 
consulting them at windy corners, could not have 
sighted it with these instructions. Peter, you see, 
just said anything that came into his head. 

At first his companions trusted him implicitly, 
and so great were the delights of flying that they 
wasted time circling round church spires or any 
other tall objects on the way that took their fancy. 

John and Michael raced, Michael getting a 
start. 

They recalled with contempt that not so long 
ago they had thought themselves fine fellows for 
being able to fly round a room. 

Not so long ago. But how long ago? They 
were flying over the sea before this thought began 
to disturb Wendy seriously. John thought it was 
their second sea and their third night. 

4 8 



THE FLIGHT 

Sometimes it was dark and sometimes light, 
and now they were very cold and again too warm. 
Did they really feel hungry at times, or were they 
merely pretending, because Peter had such a jolly 
new way of feeding them? His way was to pur- 
sue birds who had food in their mouths suitable 
for humans and snatch it from them; then the 
birds would follow and snatch it back; and they 
would all go chasing each other gaily for miles, 
parting at last with mutual expressions of good- 
will. But Wendy noticed with gentle concern 
that Peter did not seem to know that this was 
rather an odd way of getting your bread and but- 
ter, nor even that there are other ways. 

Certainly they did not pretend to be sleepy, 
they were sleepy; and that was a danger, for the 
moment they popped off, down they fell. The 
awful thing was that Peter thought this funny. 

"There he goes again! 55 he would cry gleefully, 
as Michael suddenly dropped like a stone. 

"Save him, save him!" cried Wendy, looking 
with horror at the cruel sea far below. Eventually 
Peter would dive through the air, and catch Mi- 
chael just before he could strike the sea, and it 
was lovely the way he did it; but he always waited 
till the last moment, and you felt it was his clev- 
erness that interested him and not the saving of 
human life. Also he was fond of variety, and the 
sport that engrossed him one moment would sud- 

49 



PETER AND WENDY 

denly cease to engage him, so there was always the 
possibility that the next time you fell he would let 
you go. 

He could sleep in the air without falling, by 
merely lying on his back and floating, but this 
was, partly at least, because he was so light that if 
you got behind him and blew he went faster. 

"Do be more polite to him," Wendy whispered 
to John, when they were playing "Follow my 
Leader/' 

"Then tell him to stop showing off," said John. 

When playing Follow my Leader, Peter would 
fly close to the water and touch each shark's tail in 
passing, just as in the street you may run your 
finger along an iron railing. They could not fol- 
low him in this with much success, so perhaps it 
was rather like showing off, especially as he kept 
looking behind to see how many tails they missed. 

"You must be nice to him," Wendy impressed 
on her brothers. "What could we do if he were 
to leave us!" 

"We could go back," Michael said. 

"How could we ever find our way back without 
him?" 

"Well, then, we could go on," said John. 

"That is the awful thing, John. We should 
have to go on, for we don't know how to stop." 

This was true, Peter had forgotten to show them 
how to stop. 

5o 



THE FLIGHT 

John said that if the worst came to the worst, 
all they had to do was to go straight on, for the 
world was round, and so in time they must come 
back to their own window. 

"And who is to get food for us, John?" 

"I nipped a bit out of that eagle's mouth pretty 
neatly, Wendy/' 

"After the twentieth try," Wendy reminded 
him. "And even though we became good at pick- 
ing up food, see how we bump against clouds and 
things if he is not near to give us a hand/' 

Indeed they were constantly bumping. They 
could now fly strongly, though they still kicked 
far too much; but if they saw a cloud in 
front of them, the more they tried to avoid 
it, the more certainly did they bump into it. 
If Nana had been with them, she would have had 
a bandage round Michael's forehead by this 
time. 

Peter was not with them for the moment, and 
they felt rather lonely up there by themselves. He 
could go so much faster than they that he would 
suddenly shoot out of sight, to have some adven- 
ture in which they had no share. He would come 
down laughing over something fearfully funny 
he had been saying to a star, but he had already 
forgotten what it was, or he would come up with 
mermaid scales still sticking to him, and yet not 
be able to say for certain what had been happen- 

51 



PETER AND WENDY 

ing. It was really rather irritating to children 
who had never seen a mermaid. 

"And if he forgets them so quickly," Wendy 
argued, "how can we expect that he will go on 
remembering us?" 

Indeed, sometimes when he returned he did not 
remember them, at least not well. Wendy was 
sure of it. She saw recognition come into his eyes 
as he was about to pass them the time of day and 
go on; once even she had to call him by name. 

"I'm Wendy," she said agitatedly. 

He was very sorry. "I say, Wendy," he whis- 
pered to her, "always if you see me forgetting you, 
just keep on saying Tm Wendy/ and then I'll re- 
member." 

Of course this was rather unsatisfactory. How- 
ever, to make amends he showed them how to lie 
out flat on a strong wind that was going their way, 
and this was such a pleasant change that they tried 
it several times and found they could sleep thus 
with security. Indeed they would have slept 
longer, but Peter tired quickly of sleeping, and 
soon he would cry in his captain voice, "We get 
off here." So with occasional tiffs, but on the 
whole rollicking, they drew near the Neverland; 
for after many moons they did reach it, and, what 
is more, they had been going pretty straight all the 
time, not perhaps so much owing to the guidance 
of Peter or Tink as because the island was out 

52 



THE FLIGHT 

looking for them. It is only thus that any one 

may sight those magic shores. 
'There it is," said Peter calmly. 
"Where, where?" 

"Where all the arrows are pointing." 
Indeed a million golden arrows were pointing 

it out to the children, all directed by their friend 

the sun, who wanted them to be sure of their way 

before leaving them for the night. 

Wendy and John and Michael stood on tip-toe 

in the air to get their first sight of the island. 

Strange to say, they all recognised it at once, and 

until fear fell upon them they hailed it, not as 

something long dreamt of and seen at last, but as 

a familiar friend to whom they were returning 

home for the holidays. 

"John, there's the lagoon!" 

"Wendy, look at the turtles burying their eggs 

in the sand." 

"I say, John, I see your flamingo with the 

broken leg!" 

"Look, Michael, there's your cave!" 

"John, what's that in the brushwood 1 ?" 

"It's a wolf with her whelps. Wendy, I do 

believe that's your little whelp !" 

"There's my boat, John, with her sides stove in !" 
"No, it isn't! Why, we burned your boat." 
"That's her, at any rate. I say, John, I see the 

smoke of the redskin camp !" 

53 



PETER AND WENDY 

"Where? Show me, and I'll tell you by the 
way the smoke curls whether they are on the war- 
path." 

"There, just across the Mysterious River." 

"I see now. Yes, they are on the war-path 
right enough." 

Peter was a little annoyed with them for know- 
ing so much, but if he wanted to lord it over them 
his triumph was at hand, for have I not told you 
that anon fear fell upon them? 

It came as the arrows went, leaving the island 
in gloom. 

In the old days at home the Neverland had 
always begun to look a little dark and threatening 
by bedtime. Then unexplored patches arose in it 
and spread, black shadows moved about in them, 
the roar of the beasts of prey was quite different 
now, and above all, you lost the certainty that you 
would win. You were quite glad that the night- 
lights were in. You even liked Nana to say that 
this was just the mantelpiece over here, and that 
the Neverland was all make-believe. 

Of course the Neverland had been make-believe 
in those days, but it was real now, and there were 
no night-lights, and it was getting darker every 
moment, and where was Nana? 

They had been flying apart, but they huddled 
close to Peter now. His careless manner had gone 
at last, his eyes were sparkling, and a tingle went 

54 




THE NEVER NEVER LAND 



THE FLIGHT 

through them every time they touched his body. 
They were now over the fearsome island, flying 
so low that sometimes a tree grazed their feet. 
Nothing horrid was visible in the air, yet their 
progress had become slow and laboured, exactly as 
if they were pushing their way through hostile 
forces. Sometimes they hung in the air until 
Peter had beaten on it with his fists. 

"They don't want us to land/' he explained. 

"Who are they ?" Wendy whispered, shuddering. 

But he could not or would not say. Tinker 
Bell had been asleep on his shoulder, but now he 
wakened her and sent her on in front. 

Sometimes he poised himself in the air, listen- 
ing intently, with his hand to his ear, and again 
he would stare down with eyes so bright that they 
seemed to bore two holes to earth. Having done 
these things, he went on again. x 

His courage was almost appalling. "Would 
you like an adventure now," he said casually to 
John, "or would you like to have your tea first?" 

Wendy said "tea first" quickly, and Michael 
pressed her hand in gratitude, but the braver John 
hesitated. 

"What kind of adventure?" he asked cau- 
tiously. 

"There's a pirate asleep in the pampas just be- 
neath us," Peter told him. "If you like, we'll go 
down and kill him." 

55 



PETER AND WENDY 

"I don't see him," John said after a long pause. 

"I do." 

"Suppose," John said, a little huskily, "he were 
to wake up." 

Peter spoke indignantly. "You don't think I 
would kill him while he was sleeping! I would 
wake him first, and then kill him. That's the way 
I always do." 

"I say! Do you kill many?" 

"Tons." 

John said "how ripping," but decided to have 
tea first. He asked if there were many pirates on 
the island just now, and Peter said he had never 
known so many. 

"Who is captain now?" 

"Hook," answered Peter, and his face became 
very stern as he said that hated word. 

"Jas. Hook?" 

"Ay." 

Then indeed Michael began to cry, and even 
John could speak in gulps only, for they knew 
Hook's reputation. 

"He was Blackbeard's bo'sun," John whispered 
huskily. "He is the worst of them all. He is the 
only man of whom Barbecue was afraid." 

"That's him," said Peter. 

"What is he like? Is he big?" 

"He is not so big as he was." 

"How do you mean?" 

56 



THE FLIGHT 

"I cut off a bit of him/' 

"You!" 

"Yes, me," said Peter sharply. 

"I wasn't meaning to be disrespectful." 

"Oh, all right." 

"But, I say, what bit?" 

"His right hand." 

"Then he can't fight now?" 

"Oh, can't he just!" 

"Left-hander?" 

"He has an iron hook instead of a right hand, 
and he claws with it." 

"Claws !" 

"I say, John," said Peter. 

"Yes." 

"Say, c Ay, ay, sir.' " 

"Ay, ay, sir." 

"There is one thing," Peter continued, "that 
every boy who serves under me has to promise, 
and so must you." 

John paled. 

"It is this, if we meet Hook in open fight, you 
must leave him to me." 

"I promise," John said loyally. 

For the moment they were feeling less eerie, be- 
cause Tink was flying with them, and in her light 
they could distinguish each other. Unfortunately 
she could not fly so slowly as they, and so she had 
to go round and round them in a circle in which 

57 



PETER AND WENDY 

they moved as in a halo. Wendy quite liked it, 
until Peter pointed out the drawback. 

"She tells me," he said, "that the pirates sighted 
us before the darkness came, and got Long Tom 
out." 

"The big gun?" 

"Yes. And of course they must see her light, 
and if they guess we are near it they are sure to 
let fly." 

"Wendy!" 

"John!" 

"Michael !" 

"Tell her to go away at once, Peter," the three 
cried simultaneously, but he refused. 

"She thinks we have lost the way," he replied 
stiffly, "and she is rather frightened. You don't 
think I would send her away all by herself when 
she is frightened!" 

For a moment the circle of light was broken, 
and something gave Peter a loving little pinch. 

"Then tell her," Wendy begged, "to put out her 
light." 

"She can't put it out. That is about the only 
thing fairies can't do. It just goes out of itself 
when she falls asleep, same as the stars." 

"Then tell her to sleep at once," John almost 
ordered. 

"She can't sleep except when she's sleepy. It's 
the only other thing fairies can't do." 

58 



THE FLIGHT 

"Seems to me," growled John, "these are the 
only two things worth doing." 

Here he got a pinch, but not a loving one. 

"If only one of us had a pocket," Peter said, 
"we could carry her in it." However, they had 
set off in such a hurry that there was not a pocket 
between the four of them. 

He had a happy idea. John's hat ! 

Tink agreed to travel by hat if it was carried in 
the hand. John carried it, though she had hoped 
to be carried by Peter. Presently Wendy took the 
hat, because John said it struck against his knee as 
he flew ; and this, as we shall see, led to mischief, 
for Tinker Bell hated to be under an obligation to 
Wendy. 

In the black topper the light was completely 
hidden, and they flew on in silence. It was the 
stillest silence they had ever known, broken once 
by a distant lapping, which Peter explained was 
the wild beasts drinking at the ford, and again by 
a rasping sound that might have been the branches 
of trees rubbing together, but he said it was the 
redskins sharpening their knives. 

Even these noises ceased. To Michael the lone- 
liness was dreadful. "If only something would 
make a sound !" he cried. 

As if in answer to his request, the air was rent 
by the most tremendous crash he had ever heard. 
The pirates had fired Long Tom at them. 

59 



PETER AND WENDY 

The roar of it echoed through the mountains, 
and the echoes seemed to cry savagely, ' 'Where 
are they, where are they, where are they?" 

Thus sharply did the terrified three learn the 
difference between an island of make-believe and 
the same island come true. 

When at last the heavens were steady again, 
John and Michael found themselves alone in the 
darkness. John was treading the air mechanically, 
and Michael without knowing how to float was 
floating. 

"Are you shot?" John whispered tremulously. 

"I haven't tried yet," Michael whispered back. 

We know now that no one had been hit. Peter, 
however, had been carried by the wind of the shot 
far out to sea, while Wendy was blown upwards 
with no companion but Tinker Bell. 

It would have been well for Wendy if at that 
moment she had dropped the hat. 

I don't know whether the idea came suddenly to 
Tink, or whether she had planned it on the way, 
but she at once popped out of the hat and began to 
lure Wendy to her destruction. 

Tink was not all bad: or, rather, she was all 
bad just now, but, on the other hand, some- 
times she was all good. Fairies have to be one 
thing or the other, because being so small they un- 
fortunately have room for one feeling only at a 
time. They are, however, allowed to change, only 

60 



THE FLIGHT 

it must be a complete change. At present she was 
full of jealousy of Wendy. What she said in her 
lovely tinkle Wendy could not of course under- 
stand, and I believe some of it was bad words, but 
it sounded kind, and she flew back and forward, 
plainly meaning "Follow me, and all will be 
well." 

What else could poor Wendy do? She called 
to Peter and John and Michael, and got only 
mocking echoes in reply. She did not yet know 
that Tink hated her with the fierce hatred of a 
very woman. And so, bewildered, and now stag- 
gering in her flight, she followed Tink to her 
doom. 



6r 



CHAPTER V 

THE ISLAND COME TRUE 

Feeling that Peter was on his way back, the 
Neverland had again woke into life. We ought 
to use the pluperfect and say wakened, but woke 
is better and was always used by Peter. 

In his absence things are usually quiet on the 
island. The fairies take an hour longer in the 
morning, the beasts attend to their young, the red- 
skins feed heavily for six days and nights, 
and when pirates and lost boys meet they merely 
bite their thumbs at each other. But with the 
coming of Peter, who hates lethargy, they are all 
under way again: if you put your ear to the 
ground now, you would hear the whole island 
seething with life. 

On this evening the chief forces of the island 
were disposed as follows. The lost boys were out 
looking for Peter, the pirates were out looking for 
the lost boys, the redskins were out looking for the 
pirates, and the beasts were out looking for the 
redskins. They were going round and round the 

62 



THE ISLAND COME TRUE 

island, but they did not meet because all were 
going at the same rate. 

All wanted blood except the boys, who liked it 
as a rule, but to-night were out to greet their cap- 
tain. The boys on the island vary, of course, in 
numbers, according as they get killed and so on; 
and when they seem to be growing up, which is 
against the rules, Peter thins them out ; but at this 
time there were six of them, counting the twins as 
two. Let us pretend to lie here among the sugar- 
cane and watch them as they steal by in single 
file, each with his hand on his dagger. 

They are forbidden by Peter to look in the least 
like him, and they wear the skins of bears slain by 
themselves, in which they are so round and furry 
that when they fall they roll. They have there- 
fore become very sure-footed. 

The first to pass is Tootles, not the least brave 
but the most unfortunate of all that gallant band. 
He had been in fewer adventures than any of 
them, because the big things constantly happened 
just when he had stepped round the corner; all 
would be quiet, he would take the opportunity of 
going off to gather a few sticks for firewood, and 
then when he returned the others would be sweep- 
ing up the blood. This ill-luck had given a gentle 
melancholy to his countenance, but instead of 
souring his nature had sweetened it, so that he was 
quite the humblest of the boys. Poor kind 

63 



PETER AND WENDY 

Tootles, there is danger in the air for you to-night. 
Take care lest an adventure is now offered you, 
which, if accepted, will plunge you in deepest woe. 
Tootles, the fairy Tink who is bent on mischief 
this night is looking for a tool, and she thinks you 
the most easily tricked of the boys. 'Ware Tinker 
Bell. 

Would that he could hear us, but we are not 
really on the island, and he passes by, biting his 
knuckles. 

Next comes Nibs, the gay and debonair, fol- 
lowed by Slightly, who cuts whistles out of the 
trees and dances ecstatically to his own tunes. 
Slightly is the most conceited of the boys. He 
thinks he remembers the days before he was lost, 
with their manners and customs, and this has given 
his nose an offensive tilt. Curly is fourth; he is a 
pickle, and so often has he had to deliver up his 
person when Peter said sternly, "Stand forth the 
one who did this thing," that now at the command 
he stands forth automatically whether he has done 
it or no. Last come the Twins, who cannot be 
described because we should be sure to be describ- 
ing the wrong one. Peter never quite knew what 
twins were, and his band were not allowed to 
know anything he did not know, so these two were 
always vague about themselves, and did their best 
to give satisfaction by keeping close together in an 
apologetic sort of way. 

6 4 



THE ISLAND COME TRUE 

The boys vanish in the gloom, and after a pause, 
but not a long pause, for things go briskly on the 
island, come the pirates on their track. We hear 
them before they are seen, and it is always the 
same dreadful song: 

"Avast belay, yo ho, heave to, 

A-pirating we go, 
And if we 're parted by a shot 
We 're sure to meet below!" 

A more villainous-looking lot never hung in a 
row on Execution dock. Here, a little in advance, 
ever and again with his head to the ground listen- 
ing, his great arms bare, pieces of eight in his ears 
as ornaments, is the handsome Italian Cecco, who 
cut his name in letters of blood on the back of the 
governor of the prison at Gao. That gigantic 
black behind him has had many names since he 
dropped the one with which dusky mothers still 
terrify their children on the banks of the Guadjo- 
mo. Here is Bill Jukes, every inch of him tat- 
tooed, the same Bill Jukes who got six dozen on 
the Walrus from Flint before he would drop the 
bag of moidores; and Cookson, said to be Black 
Murphy's brother (but this was never proved), 
and Gentleman Starkey, once an usher in a public 
school and still dainty in his ways of killing; and 
• Skylights (Morgan's Skylights); and the Irish 
bo' sun Smee, an oddly genial man who stabbed, so 

65 



PETER AND WENDY 

to speak, without offence, and was the only Non- 
conformist in Hook's crew; and Noodler, whose 
hands were fixed on backwards ; and Robt. Mullins 
and Alf Mason and many another ruffian long 
known and feared on the Spanish Main. 

In the midst of them, the blackest and largest 
jewel in that dark setting, reclined James Hook, 
or as he wrote himself, Jas. Hook, of whom it is 
said he was the only man that the Sea-Cook feared. 
He lay at his ease in a rough chariot drawn and 
propelled by his men, and instead of a right hand 
he had the iron hook with which ever and anon he 
encouraged them to increase their pace. As dogs 
this terrible man treated and addressed them, and 
as dogs they obeyed him. In person he was 
cadaverous and blackavized, and his hair was 
dressed in long curls, which at a little distance 
looked like black candles, and gave a singularly 
threatening expression to his handsome coun- 
tenance. His eyes were of the blue of the forget- 
me-not, and of a profound melancholy, save when 
he was plunging his hook into you, at which time 
two red spots appeared in them and lit them up 
horribly. In manner, something of the grand 
seigneur still clung to him, so that he even ripped 
you up with an air, and I have been told that he 
was a raconteur of repute. He was never more 
sinister than when he was most polite, which is 
probably the truest test of breeding; and the ele- 

66 



THE ISLAND COME TRUE 

gance of his diction, even when he was swearing, 
no less than the distinction of his demeanour, 
showed him one of a different caste from his crew. 
A man of indomitable courage, it was said of him 
that the only thing he shied at was the sight of his 
own blood, which was thick and of an unusual 
colour. In dress he somewhat aped the attire as- 
sociated with the name of Charles IL, having 
heard it said in some earlier period of his career 
that he bore a strange resemblance to the ill-fated 
Stuarts ; and in his mouth he had a holder of his 
own contrivance which enabled him to smoke two 
cigars at once. But undoubtedly the grimmest 
part of him was his iron claw. 

Let us now kill a pirate, to show Hook's 
method. Skylights will do. As they pass, Sky- 
lights lurches clumsily against him, ruffling his 
lace collar; the hook shoots forth, there is a tear- 
ing sound and one screech, then the body is kicked 
aside, and the pirates pass on. He has not even 
taken the cigars from his mouth. 

Such is the terrible man against whom Peter 
Pan is pitted. Which will win? 

On the trail of the pirates, stealing noiselessly 
down the war-path, which is not visible to inex- 
perienced eyes, come the redskins, every one of 
them with his eyes peeled. They carry tomahawks 
and knives, and their naked bodies gleam with 
paint and oil. Strung around them are scalps, of 

6 7 



PETER AND WENDY 

boys as well as of pirates, for these are the Pic- 
caninny tribe, and not to be confused with the 
softer-hearted Delawares or the Hurons. In the 
van, on all fours, is Great Big Little Panther, a 
brave of so many scalps that in his present position 
they somewhat impede his progress. Bringing up 
the rear, the place of greatest danger, comes Tiger 
Lily, proudly erect, a princess in her own right. 
She is the most beautiful of dusky Dianas and the 
belle of the Piccaninnies, coquettish, cold and 
amorous by turns; there is not a brave who would 
not have the wayward thing to wife, but she 
staves off the altar with a hatchet. Observe how 
they pass over fallen twigs without making the 
slightest noise. The only sound to be heard is 
their somewhat heavy breathing. The fact is that 
they are all a little fat just now after the heavy 
gorging, but in time they will work this off. For 
the moment, however, it constitutes their chief 
danger. 

The redskins disappear as they have come like 
shadows, and soon their place is taken by the 
beasts, a great and motley procession : lions, tigers, 
bears, and the innumerable smaller savage things 
that flee from them, for every kind of beast, and, 
more particularly, all the man-eaters, live cheek 
by jowl on the favoured island. Their tongues are 
hanging out, they are hungry to-night. 

When they have passed, comes the last figure of 

68 



THE ISLAND COME TRUE 

all, a gigantic crocodile. We shall see for whom 
she is looking presently. 

The crocodile passes, but soon the boys appear 
again, for the procession must continue indefi- 
nitely until one of the parties stops or changes its 
pace. Then quickly they will be on top of each 
other. 

All are keeping a sharp look-out in front, but 
none suspects that the danger may be creeping up 
from behind. This shows how real the island 
was. 

The first to fall out of the moving circle was the 
boys. They flung themselves down on the sward, 
close to their underground home. 

"I do wish Peter would come back," every one 
of them said nervously, though in height and still 
more in breadth they were all larger than their 
captain. 

Cf I am the only one who is not afraid of the 
pirates," Slightly said, in the tone that prevented 
his being a general favourite, but perhaps some 
distant sound disturbed him, for he added hastily, 
"but I wish he would come back, and tell us 
whether he has heard anything more about Cin- 
derella." 

They talked of Cinderella, and Tootles was con- 
fident that his mother must have been very like 
her. 

It was only in Peter's absence that they could 

6 9 



PETER AND WENDY 

speak of mothers, the subject being forbidden by 
him as silly. 

"All I remember about my mother," Nibs told 
them, "is that she often said to father, 'Oh, how I 
wish I had a cheque-book of my own!' I don't 
know what a cheque-book is, but I should just love 
to give my mother one." 

While they talked they heard a distant sound. 
You or I, not being wild things of the woods, 
would have heard nothing, but they heard it, and 
it was the grim song : 

"Yo ho, yo ho, the pirate life, 

The flag o' skull and bones, 
A merry hour, a hempen rope, 
And hey for Davy Jones." 

At once the lost boys — but where are they? 
They are no longer there. Rabbits could not have 
disappeared more quickly. 

I will tell you where they are. With the ex- 
ception of Nibs, who has darted away to recon- 
noitre, they are already in their home under the 
ground, a very delightful residence of which we 
shall see a good deal presently. But how have 
they reached it? for there is no entrance to be seen, 
not so much as a large stone, which if rolled away 
would disclose the mouth of a cave. Look closely, 
however, and you may note that there are here 
seven large trees, each with a hole in its hollow 

70 



THE ISLAND COME TRUE 

trunk as large as a boy. These are the seven en- 
trances to the home under the ground, for which 
Hook has been searching in vain these many 
moons. Will he find it to-night? 

As the pirates advanced, the quick eye of 
Starkey sighted Nibs disappearing through the 
wood, and at once his pistol flashed out. But an 
iron claw gripped his shoulder. 

"Captain, let go!" he cried, writhing. 

Now for the first time we hear the voice of 
Hook. It was a black voice. "Put back that pis- 
tol first," it said threateningly. 

ff It was one of those boys you hate. I could 
have shot him dead." 

"Ay, and the sound would have brought Tiger 
Lily's redskins upon us. Do ,you want to lose 
your scalp?" 

"Shall I after him, captain," asked pathetic 
Smee, "and tickle him with Johnny Corkscrew?" 
Smee had pleasant names for everything, and his 
cutlass was Johnny Corkscrew, because he wrig- 
gled it in the wound. One could mention many 
lovable traits in Smee. For instance, after killing, 
it was his spectacles he wiped instead of his 
weapon. 

"Johnny's a silent fellow," he reminded Hook. 

"Not now, Smee," Hook said darkly. "He is 
only one, and I want to mischief all the seven. 
Scatter and look for them." 

71 



PETER AND WENDY 

The pirates disappeared among the trees, and 
in a moment their captain and Smee were alone. 
Hook heaved a heavy sigh, and I know not why it 
was, perhaps it was because of the soft beauty of 
the evening, but there came over him a desire to 
confide to his faithful bo'sun the story of his life. 
He spoke long and earnestly, but what it was all 
about Smee, who was rather stupid, did not know 
in the least. 

Anon he caught the word Peter. 

"Most of all," Hook was saying passionately, 
"I want their captain, Peter Pan. 'Twas he cut 
off my arm." He brandished the hook threaten- 
ingly. "Pve waited long to shake his hand with 
this. Oh, ril tear him!" 

"And yet," said Smee, "I have often heard you 
say that hook was worth a score of hands, for 
combing the hair and other homely uses." 

"Ay," the captain answered, "if I was a mother 
I would pray to have my children born with this 
instead of that," and he cast a look of pride upon 
his iron hand and one of scorn upon the other. 
Then again he frowned. 

"Peter flung my arm," he said, wincing, "to a 
crocodile that happened to be passing by." 

"I have often," said Smee, "noticed your 
strange dread of crocodiles." 

"Not of crocodiles," Hook corrected him, "but 
of that one crocodile." He lowered his voice. "It 

72 



THE ISLAND COME TRUE 

liked my arm so much, Smee, that it has followed 
me ever since, from sea to sea and from land to 
land, licking its lips for the rest of me." 

"In a way," said Smee, "it's a sort of compli- 
ment." 

"I want no such compliments," Hook barked 
petulantly. "I want Peter Pan, who first gave the 
brute its taste for me." 

He sat down on a large mushroom, and now 
there was a quiver in his voice. "Smee," he said 
huskily, "that crocodile would have had me before 
this, but by a lucky chance it swallowed a clock 
which goes tick tick inside it, and so before it can 
reach me I hear the tick and bolt." He laughed, 
but in a hollow way. 

"Some day," said Smee, "the clock will run 
down, and then he'll get you." 

Hook wetted his dry lips. "Ay," he said, 
"that's the fear that haunts me." 

Since sitting down he had felt curiously warm. 
"Smee," he said, "this seat is hot." He jumped 
up. "Odds bobs, hammer and tongs, I'm burning." 

They examined the mushroom, which was of a 
size and solidity unknown on the mainland; they 
tried to pull it up, and it came away at once in 
their hands, for it had no root. Stranger still, 
smoke began at once to ascend. The pirates 
looked at each other. "A chimney!" they both 
exclaimed. 

73 



PETER AND WENDY 

They had indeed discovered the chimney of the 
home under the ground. It was the custom of the 
boys to stop it with a mushroom when enemies 
were in the neighbourhood. 

Not only smoke came out of it. There came 
also children's voices, for so safe did the boys feel 
in their hiding-place that they were gaily chatter- 
ing. The pirates listened grimly, and then re- 
placed the mushroom. They looked around them 
and noted the holes in the seven trees. 

"Did you hear them say Peter Pan's from 
home?" Smee whispered, fidgeting with Johnny 
Corkscrew. 

Hook nodded. He stood for a long time lost 
in thought, and at last a curdling smile lit up his 
swarthy face. Smee had been waiting for it. 
"Unrip your plan, captain," he cried eagerly. 

"To return to the ship," Hook replied slowly 
through his teeth, "and cook a large rich cake of 
a jolly thickness with green sugar on it. There 
can be but one room below, for there is but one 
chimney. The silly moles had not the sense to see 
that they did not need a door apiece. That shows 
they have no mother. We will leave the cake on the 
shore of the Mermaids' Lagoon. These boys are 
always swimming about there, playing with the 
mermaids. They will find the cake and they will 
gobble it up, because, having no mother, they don't 
know how dangerous 'tis to eat rich damp cake." 

74 



THE ISLAND COME TRUE 

He burst into laughter, not hollow laughter now, 
but honest laughter. "Aha, they will die !" 

Smee had listened with growing admiration. 

"It's the wickedest, prettiest policy ever I heard 
of!" he cried, and in their exultation they danced 
and sang : 

"Avast, belay, when I appear, 

By fear they're overtook, 
Nought's left upon your bones when you 
Have shaken claws with Cook." 

They began the verse, but they never finished 
it, for another sound broke in and stilled them. It 
was at first such a tiny sound that a leaf might 
have fallen on it and smothered it, but as it came 
nearer it was more distinct. 

Tick tick tick tick ! 

Hook stood shuddering, one foot in the air. 

"The crocodile !" he gasped, and bounded away, 
followed by his bo'sun. 

It was indeed the crocodile. It had passed the 
redskins, who were now on the trail of the other 
pirates. It oozed on after Hook. 

Once more the boys emerged into the open ; but 
the dangers of the night were not yet over, for 
presently Nibs rushed breathless into their midst, 
pursued by a pack of wolves. The tongues of the 
pursuers were hanging out; the baying of them 
was horrible. 

75 



PETER AND WENDY 

"Save me, save me!" cried Nibs, falling on the 
ground. 

"But what can we do, what can we do?" 

It was a high compliment to Peter that at that 
dire moment their thoughts turned to him. 

"What would Peter do?" they cried simul- 
taneously. 

Almost in the same breath they cried, "Peter 
would look at them through his legs." 

And then, "Let us do what Peter would do." 

It is quite the most successful way of defying 
wolves, and as one boy they bent and looked 
through their legs. The next moment is the long 
one, but victory came quickly, for as the boys ad- 
vanced upon them in this terrible attitude, the 
wolves dropped their tails and fled. 

Now Nibs rose from the ground, and the others 
thought that his staring eyes still saw the wolves. 
But it was not wolves he saw. 

"I have seen a wonderfuller thing," he cried, as 
they gathered round him eagerly. "A great white 
bird. It is flying this way." 

"What kind of a bird, do you think?" 

"I don't know," Nibs said, awestruck, "but it 
looks so weary, and as it flies it moans, 'Poor 
Wendy. 5 " 

"Poor Wendy?" 

"I remember," said Slightly instantly, "there 
are birds called Wendies." 

7 6 



THE ISLAND COME TRUE 

"See, it comes!" cried Curly, pointing to 
Wendy in the heavens. 

Wendy was now almost overhead, and they 
could hear her plaintive cry. But more distinct 
came the shrill voice of Tinker Bell. The jealous 
fairy had now cast off all disguise of friendship, 
and was darting at her victim from every direc- 
tion, pinching savagely each time she touched. 

"Hullo, Tink," cried the wondering boys. 

Tink's reply rang out: "Peter wants you to 
shoot the Wendy." 

It was not in their nature to question when 
Peter ordered. "Let us do what Peter wishes," 
cried the simple boys. "Quick, bows and arrows !" 

All but Tootles popped down their trees. He 
had a bow and arrow with him, and Tink noted it, 
and rubbed her little hands. 

"Quick, Tootles, quick," she screamed. "Peter 
will be so pleased." 

Tootles excitedly fitted the arrow to his bow. 
"Out of the way, Tink," he shouted, and then he 
fired, and Wendy fluttered to the ground with an 
arrow in her breast. 



77 



CHAPTER VI 

THE LITTLE HOUSE 

Foolish Tootles was standing like a conqueror 
over Wendy's body when the other boys sprang, 
armed, from their trees. 

"You are too late," he cried proudly, "I have 
shot the Wendy. Peter will be so pleased with 
me." 

Overhead Tinker Bell shouted "Silly ass !" and 
darted into hiding. The others did not hear her. 

They had crowded round Wendy, and as they 
looked a terrible silence fell upon the wood. If 
Wendy's heart had been beating they would all 
have heard it. 

Slightly was the first to speak. "This is no 
bird," he said in a scared voice. "I think it must 
be a lady." 

"A lady?" said Tootles, and fell a-trembling. 

"And we have killed her," Nibs said hoarsely. 

They all whipped off their caps. 

"Now I see," Curly said; "Peter was bringing 
her to us." He threw himself sorrowfully on the 
ground. 

78 



THE LITTLE HOUSE 

"A lady to take care of us at last," said one of 
the twins, "and you have killed her!" 

They were sorry for him, but sorrier for them- 
selves, and when he took a step nearer them they 
turned from him. 

Tootles' face was very white, but there was a dig- 
nity about him nowthathad neverbeen there before. 

"I did it," he said, reflecting. "When ladies 
used to come to me in dreams, I said, Tretty 
mother, pretty mother.' But when at last she 
really came, I shot her." 

He moved slowly away. 

"Don't go," they called in pity. 

"I must," he answered, shaking; "I am so afraid 
of Peter." 

It was at this tragic moment that they heard a 
sound which made the heart of every one of them 
rise to his mouth. They heard Peter crow. 

"Peter!" they cried, for it was always thus that 
he signalled his return. 

"Hide her," they whispered, and gathered 
hastily around Wendy. But Tootles stood aloof. 

Again came that ringing crow, and Peter 
dropped in front of them. "Greeting, boys," he 
cried, and mechanically they saluted, and then 
again was silence. 

He frowned. 

"I am back," he said hotly, "why do you not 
cheer?" 

79 



PETER AND WENDY 

They opened their mouths, but the cheers would 
not come. He overlooked it in his haste to tell the 
glorious tidings. 

"Great news, boys," he cried, "I have brought 
at last a mother for you all." 

Still no sound, except a little thud from 
Tootles as he dropped on his knees. 

"Have you not seen her?" asked Peter, becom- 
ing troubled. "She flew this way." 

"Ah me!" one voice said, and another said, 
"Oh, mournful day." 

Tootles rose. "Peter," he said quietly, "I will 
show her to you," and when the others would still 
have hidden her he said, "Back, twins, letPetersee." 

So they all stood back, and let him see, and after 
he had looked for a little time he did not know 
what to do next. 

"She is dead," he said uncomfortably. "Per- 
haps she is frightened at being dead." 

He thought of hopping off in a comic sort of 
way till he was out of sight of her, and then never 
going near the spot any more. They would all 
have been glad to follow if he had done this. 

But there was the arrow. He took it from her 
heart and faced his band. 

"Whose arrow?" he demanded sternly. 

"Mine, Peter," said Tootles on his knees. 

"Oh, dastard hand," Peter said, and he raised 
the arrow to use it as a dagger. 

80 



THE LITTLE HOUSE 

Tootles did not flinch. He bared his breast. 
"Strike, Peter/' he said firmly, "strike true." 

Twice did Peter raise the arrow, and twice did 
his hand fall. "I cannot strike," he said with 
awe, "there is something stays my hand." 

All looked at him in wonder, save Nibs, who 
fortunately looked at Wendy. 

"It is she," he cried, "the Wendy lady, see, her 
arm!" 

Wonderful to relate, Wendy had raised her 
arm. Nibs bent over her and listened reverently. 
"I think she said Toor Tootles/ " he whispered. 

"She lives," Peter said briefly. 

Slightly cried instantly, "The Wendy lady 
lives." 

Then Peter knelt beside her and found his but- 
ton. You remember she had put it on a chain that 
she wore round her neck. 

"See," he said, "the arrow struck against this. 
It is the kiss I gave her. It has saved her life." 

"I remember kisses," Slightly interposed 
quickly, "let me see it. Ay, that's a kiss." 

Peter did not hear him. He was begging 
Wendy to get better quickly, so that he could 
show her the mermaids. Of course she could not 
answer yet, being still in a frightful faint; but 
from overhead came a wailing note. 

"Listen to Tink," said Curly, "she is crying be- 
cause the Wendy lives." 

81 



PETER AND WENDY 

Then they had to tell Peter of Tink's crime, and 
almost never had they seen him look so stern. 

' 'Listen, Tinker Bell," he cried, "I am your 
friend no more. Begone from me for ever." 

She flew on to his shoulder and pleaded, but he 
brushed her off. Not until Wendy again raised 
her arm did he relent sufficiently to say, "Well, 
not for ever, but for a whole week/' 

Do you think Tinker Bell was grateful to 
Wendy for raising her arm? Oh dear no, never 
wanted to pinch her so much. Fairies indeed are 
strange, and Peter, who understood them best, 
often cuffed them. 

But what to do with Wendy in her present 
delicate state of health? 

"Let us carry her down into the house," Curly 
suggested. 

"Ay," said Slightly, "that is what one does with 
ladies." 

"No, no," Peter said, "you must not touch her. 
It would not be sufficiently respectful." 

"That," said Slightly, "is what I was thinking." 

"But if she lies there," Tootles said, "she will 
die." 

"Ay, she will die," Slightly admitted, "but 
there is no way out." 

"Yes, there is," cried Peter. "Let us build a 
little house round her." 

They were all delighted. "Quick," he ordered 

82 



THE LITTLE HOUSE 

them, c 'bring me each of you the best of what we 
have. Gut our house. Be sharp." 

In a moment they were as busy as tailors the 
night before a wedding. They skurried this way 
and that, down for bedding, up for firewood, and 
while they were at it, who should appear but John 
and Michael. As they dragged along the ground 
they fell asleep standing, stopped, woke up, 
moved another step and slept again. 

"John, John," Michael would cry, "wake up! 
Where is Nana, John, and mother?" 

And then John would rub his eyes and mutter, 
"It is true, we did fly." 

You may be sure they were very relieved to find 
Peter. 

"Hullo, Peter," they said. 

"Hullo," replied Peter amicably, though he had 
quite forgotten them. He was very busy at the 
moment measuring Wendy with his feet to see how 
large a house she would need. Of course he meant 
to leave room for chairs and a table. John and 
Michael watched him. 

"Is Wendy asleep?" they asked. 

"Yes." 

"John," Michael proposed, "let us wake her 
and get her to make supper for us," and as he said 
it some of the other boys rushed on carrying 
branches for the building of the house. "Look at 
them!" he cried. 

83 



PETER AND WENDY 

"Curly," said Peter in his most captainy voice, 
"see that these boys help in the building of the 
house." 

"Ay, ay, sir." 

"Build a house?" exclaimed John. 

"For the Wendy," said Curly. 

"For Wendy?" John said, aghast. "Why, she 
is only a girl !" 

"That," explained Curly, "is why we are her 
servants." 

"You ? Wendy's servants !" 

"Yes," said Peter, "and you also. Away with 
them." 

The astounded brothers were dragged away to 
hack and hew and carry. "Chairs and a fender 
first," Peter ordered. "Then we shall build the 
house round them." 

"Ay," said Slightly, "that is how a house is 
built; it all comes back to me." 

Peter thought of everything. "Slightly," he 
cried, "fetch a doctor." 

"Ay, ay," said Slightly at once, and disap- 
peared, scratching his head. But he knew Peter 
must be obeyed, and he returned in a moment, 
wearing John's hat and looking solemn. 

"Please, sir," said Peter, going to him, "are you 
a doctor?" 

The difference between him and the other boys 
at such a time was that they knew it was make- 

8 4 



THE LITTLE HOUSE 

believe, while to him make-believe and true were 
exactly the same thing. This sometimes troubled 
them, as when they had to make-believe that they 
had had their dinners. 

If they broke down in their make-believe he 
rapped them on the knuckles. 

"Yes, my little man," anxiously replied 
Slightly, who had chapped knuckles. 

"Please, sir/' Peter explained, "a lady lies very 
ill." 

She was lying at their feet, but Slightly had the 
sense not to see her. 

"Tut, tut, tut," he said, "where does she lie?" 

"In yonder glade." 

"I will put a glass thing in her mouth," said 
Slightly, and he made-believe to do it, while Peter 
waited. It was an anxious moment when the glass 
thing was withdrawn. 

"How is she?" inquired Peter. 

"Tut, tut, tut," said Slightly, this has cured her." 

"I am glad!" Peter cried. 

"I will call again in the evening," Slightly said; 
"give her beef tea out of a cup with a spout to it" ; 
but after he had returned the hat to John he blew 
big breaths, which was his habit on escaping from 
a difficulty. 

In the meantime the wood had been alive with 
the sound of axes ; almost everything needed for a 
cosy dwelling already lay at Wendy's feet. 

85 



PETER AND WENDY 

"If only we knew," said one, "the kind of 
house she likes best." 

"Peter," shouted another, "she is moving in her 
sleep." 

"Her mouth opens," cried a third, looking re- 
spectfully into it. "Oh, lovely!" 

"Perhaps she is going to sing in her sleep," said 
Peter. "Wendy, sing the kind of house you 
would like to have." 

Immediately, without opening her eyes, Wendy 
began to sing : 

" I wish I had a pretty house, 

The littlest ever seen, 
With funny little red walls 
And roof of mossy green." 

They gurgled with joy at this, for by the great- 
est good luck the branches they had brought were 
sticky with red sap, and all the ground was car- 
peted with moss. As they rattled up the little 
house they broke into song themselves : 

"We've built the little walls and roof 
And made a lovely door, 
So tell us, mother Wendy, 

What are you wanting more?" 

To this she answered rather greedily : 

"Oh, really next I think I'll have 

Gay windows all about, 
With roses peeping in, you know, 
And babies peeping out." 

86 



THE LITTLE HOUSE 

With a blow of their fists they made windows, 
and large yellow leaves were the blinds. But 
roses ? 

"Roses!" cried Peter sternly. 

Quickly they made-believe to grow the loveliest 
roses up the walls. 

Babies? 

To prevent Peter ordering babies they hurried 
into song again : 

" We've made the roses peeping out, 
The babes are at the door, 
We cannot make ourselves, you know, 
'Cos we've been made before." 

Peter, seeing this to be a good idea, at once pre- 
tended that it was his own. The house was quite 
beautiful, and no doubt Wendy was very cosy 
within, though, of course, they could no longer see 
her. Peter strode up and down, ordering finishing 
touches. Nothing escaped his eagle eye. Just 
when it seemed absolutely finished, 

"There's no knocker on the door," he said. 

They were very ashamed, but Tootles gave the 
sole of his shoe, and it made an excellent knocker. 

Absolutely finished now, they thought. 

Not a bit of it. "There's no chimney," Peter 
said; "we must have a chimney." 

"It certainly does need a chimney," said John 
importantly. This gave Peter an idea. He 

87 



PETER AND WENDY 

snatched the hat off John's head, knocked out the 
bottom, and put the hat on the roof. The little 
house was so pleased to have such a capital chim- 
ney that, as if to say thank you, smoke imme- 
diately began to come out of the hat. 

Now really and truly it was finished. Nothing 
remained to do but to knock. 

"All look your best," Peter warned them; "first 
impressions are awfully important/' 

He was glad no one asked him what first im- 
pressions are; they were all too busy looking their 
best. 

He knocked politely, and now the wood was as 
still as the children, not a sound to be heard except 
from Tinker Bell, who was watching from a 
branch and openly sneering. 

What the boys were wondering was, would any 
one answer the knock? If a lady, what would she 
be like? 

The door opened and a lady came out. It was 
Wendy. They all whipped off their hats. 

She looked properly surprised, and this was just 
how they had hoped she would look. 

"Where am I?" she said. 

Of course Slightly was the first to get his word 
in. "Wendy lady," he said rapidly, "for you we 
built this house." 

"Oh, say you're pleased," cried Nibs. 

"Lovely, darling house," Wendy said, and they 
88 




PETER ON GUARD 



THE LITTLE HOUSE 

were the very words they had hoped she would 
say. 

"And we are your children," cried the twins. 

Then all went on their knees, and holding out 
their arms cried, "O Wendy lady, be our mother. 5 ' 

"Ought IV Wendy said, all shining. "Of 
course it's frightfully fascinating, but you see I 
am only a little girl. I have no real experience." 

"That doesn't matter," said Peter, as if he were 
the only person present who knew all about it, 
though he was really the one who knew least. 
"What we need is just a nice motherly person." 

"Oh dear!" Wendy said, "you see I feel that is 
exactly what I am." 

"It is, it is," they all cried; "we saw it at once." 

"Very well," she said, "I will do my best. Come 
inside at once, you naughty children; I am sure 
your feet are damp. And before I put you to bed 
I have just time to finish the story of Cinderella." 

In they went; I don't know how there was room 
for them, but you can squeeze very tight in the 
Neverland. And that was the first of the many 
joyous evenings they had with Wendy. By and 
by she tucked them up in the great bed in the 
home under the trees, but she herself slept that 
night in the little house, and Peter kept watch out- 
side with drawn sword, for the pirates could be 
heard carousing far away and the wolves were on 
the prowl. The little house looked so cosy and 

8 9 



PETER AND WENDY 

safe in the darkness, with a bright light showing 
through its blinds, and the chimney smoking 
beautifully, and Peter standing on guard. After 
a time he fell asleep, and some unsteady fairies 
had to climb over him on their way home from an 
orgy. Any of the other boys obstructing the fairy 
path at night they would have mischiefed, but 
they just tweaked Peter's nose and passed on. 



90 



CHAPTER VII 

THE HOME UNDER THE GROUND 

One of the first things Peter did next day was to 
measure Wendy and John and Michael for hollow 
trees. Hook, you remember, had sneered at the 
boys for thinking they needed a tree apiece, but 
this was ignorance, for unless your tree fitted you 
it was difficult to go up and down, and no two of 
the boys were quite the same size. Once you 
fitted, you drew in your breath at the top, and 
down you went at exactly the right speed, while 
to ascend you drew in and let out alternately, and 
so wriggled up. Of course, when you have mas- 
tered the action you are able to do these things 
without thinking of them, and then nothing can 
be more graceful. 

But you simply must fit, and Peter measures 
you for your tree as carefully as for a suit of 
clothes : the only difference being that the clothes 
are made to fit you, while you have to be made to 
fit the tree. Usually it is done quite easily, as by 
your wearing too many garments or too few, but if 

91 



PETER AND WENDY 

you are bumpy in awkward places or the only 
available tree is an odd shape, Peter does some 
things to you, and after that you fit. Once you 
fit, great care must be taken to go on fitting, and 
this, as Wendy was to discover to her delight, 
keeps a whole family in perfect condition. 

Wendy and Michael fitted their trees at the 
first try, but John had to be altered a little. 

After a few days' practice they could go up and 
down as gaily as buckets in a well. And how ar- 
dently they grew to love their home under the 
ground; especially Wendy! It consisted of one 
large room, as all houses should do, with a floor in 
which you could dig if you wanted to go fishing, 
and in this floor grew stout mushrooms of a charm- 
ing colour, which were used as stools. A Never 
tree tried hard to grow in the centre of the room, 
but every morning they sawed the trunk through, 
level with the floor. By tea-time it was always 
about two feet high, and then they put a door on 
top of it, the whole thus becoming a table ; as soon 
as they cleared away, they sawed off the trunk 
again, and thus there was more room to play. 
There was an enormous fireplace which was in al- 
most any part of the room where you cared to 
light it, and across this Wendy stretched strings, 
made of fibre, from which she suspended her wash- 
ing. The bed was tilted against the wall by day, 
and let down at 6.30, when it filled nearly half the 

92 



THE HOME UNDER THE GROUND 

room ; and all the boys slept in it, except Michael, 
lying like sardines in a tin. There was a strict rule 
against turning round until one gave the signal, 
when all turned at once. Michael should have 
used it also, but Wendy would have a baby, and 
he was the littlest, and you know what women 
are, and the short and the long of it is that he was 
hung up in a basket. 

It was rough and simple, and not unlike what 
baby bears would have made of an underground 
house in the same circumstances. But there was 
one recess in the wall, no larger than a bird-cage, 
which was the private apartment of Tinker Bell. 
It could be shut off from the rest of the home by a 
tiny curtain, which Tink, who was most fastidious, 
always kept drawn when dressing or undressing. 
No woman, however large, could have had a more 
exquisite boudoir and bed-chamber combined. The 
couch, as she always called it, was a genuine 
Queen Mab, with club legs; and she varied the 
bedspreads according to what fruit-blossom was 
in season. Her mirror was a Puss-in-boots, of 
which there are now only three, unchipped, known 
to the fairy dealers; the wash-stand was Pie-crust 
and reversible, the chest of drawers an authentic 
Charming the Sixth, and the carpet and rugs of the 
best (the early) period of Margery and Robin. 
There was a chandelier from Tiddlywinks for the 
look of the thing, but of course she lit the residence 

93 



PETER AND WENDY 

herself. Tink was very contemptuous of the rest 
of the house, as indeed was perhaps inevitable, and 
her chamber, though beautiful, looked rather con- 
ceited, having the appearance of a nose perma- 
nently turned up. 

I suppose it was all especially entrancing to 
Wendy, because those rampagious boys of hers 
gave her so much to do. Really there were whole 
weeks when, except perhaps with a stocking in the 
evening, she was never above ground. The cook- 
ing, I can tell you, kept her nose to the pot, and 
even if there was nothing in it, even though there 
was no pot, she had to keep watching that it came 
aboil just the same. You never exactly knew 
whether there would be a real meal or just a make- 
believe, it all depended upon Peter's whim: he 
could eat, really eat, if it was part of a game, but 
he could not stodge just to feel stodgy, which is 
what most children like better than anything else; 
the next best thing being to talk about it. Make- 
believe was so real to him that during a meal of it 
you could see him getting rounder. Of course it 
was trying, but you simply had to follow his lead, 
and if you could prove to him that you were get- 
ting loose for your tree he let you stodge. 

Wendy's favourite time for sewing and darning 
was after they had all gone to bed. Then, as she 
expressed it, she had a breathing time for herself; 
and she occupied it in making new things for 

94 



THE HOME UNDER THE GROUND 

them, and putting double pieces on the knees, for 
they were all most frightfully hard on their knees. 

When she sat down to a basketful of their stock- 
ings, every heel with a hole in it, she would fling 
up her arms and exclaim, "Oh dear, I am sure I 
sometimes think spinsters are to be envied !" 

Her face beamed when she exclaimed this. 

You remember about her pet wolf. Well, it 
very soon discovered that she had come to the 
island and found her out, and they just ran into 
each other's arms. After that it followed her 
about everywhere. 

As time wore on did she think much about the 
beloved parents she had left behind her? This is 
a difficult question, because it is quite impossible 
to say how time does wear on in the Neverland, 
where it is calculated by moons and suns, and 
there are ever so many more of them than on the 
mainland. But I am afraid that Wendy did not 
really worry about her father and mother ; she was 
absolutely confident that they would always keep 
the window open for her to fly back by, and this 
gave her complete ease of mind. What did disturb 
her at times was that John remembered his parents 
vaguely only, as people he had once known, while 
Michael was quite willing to believe that she was 
really his mother. These things scared her a little, 
and nobly anxious to do her duty, she tried to fix 
the old life in their minds by setting them exami- 

95 



PETER AND WENDY 

nation papers on it, as like as possible to the ones 
she used to do at school. The other boys thought 
this awfully interesting, and insisted on joining, 
and they made slates for themselves, and sat round 
the table, writing and thinking hard about the 
questions she had written on another slate and 
passed round. They were the most ordinary ques- 
tions — "What was the colour of Mother's eyes? 
Which was taller, Father or Mother? Was 
Mother blonde or brunette? Answer all three 
questions if possible." "(A) Write an essay of 
not less than 40 words on How I spent my last 
Holidays, or The Carakters of Father and Mother 
compared. Only one of these to be attempted." 
Or "(1) Describe Mother's laugh; (2) Describe 
Father's laugh; (3) Describe Mother's Party 
Dress; (4) Describe the Kennel and its Inmate." 

They were just everyday questions like these, 
and when you could not answer them you were 
told to make a cross; and it was really dreadful 
what a number of crosses even John made. Of 
course the only boy who replied to every question 
was Slightly, and no one could have been more 
hopeful of coming out first, but his answers were 
perfectly ridiculous, and he really came out last: 
a melancholy thing. 

Peter did not compete. For one thing he de- 
spised all mothers except Wendy, and for another 
he was the only boy on the island who could 

96 



THE HOME UNDER THE GROUND 

neither write nor spell ; not the smallest word. He 
was above all that sort of thing. 

By the way, the questions were all written in 
the past tense. What was the colour of Mother's 
eyes, and so on. Wendy, you see, had been for- 
getting too. 

Adventures, of course, as we shall see, were of 
daily occurrence; but about this time Peter in- 
vented, with Wendy's help, a new game that fas- 
cinated him enormously, until he suddenly had no 
more interest in it, which, as you have been told, 
was what always happened with his games. It 
consisted in pretending not to have adventures, in 
doing the sort of thing John and Michael had been 
doing all their lives, sitting on stools flinging balls 
in the air, pushing each other, going out for walks 
and coming back without having killed so much as 
a grizzly. To see Peter doing nothing on a stool 
was a great sight ; he could not help looking solemn 
at such times, to sit still seemed to him such a 
comic thing to do. He boasted that he had gone a 
walk for the good of his health. For several suns 
these were the most novel of all adventures to 
him; and John and Michael had to pretend to be 
delighted also; otherwise he would have treated 
them severely. 

He often went out alone, and when he came 
back you were never absolutely certain whether he 
had had an adventure or not. He might have for- 

97 



PETER AND WENDY 

gotten it so completely that he said nothing about 
it; and then when you went out you found the 
body; and, on the other hand, he might say a great 
deal about it, and yet you could not find the body. 
Sometimes he came home with his head bandaged, 
and then Wendy cooed over him and bathed it in 
lukewarm water, while he told a dazzling tale. 
But she was never quite sure, you know. There 
were, however, many adventures which she knew 
to be true because she was in them herself, and 
there were still more that were at least partly true, 
for the other boys were in them and said they were 
wholly true. To describe them all would require 
a book as large as an English-Latin, Latin-English 
Dictionary, and the most we can do is to give one 
as a specimen of an average hour on the island. 
The difficulty is which one to choose. Should we 
take the brush with the redskins at Slightly Gulch? 
It was a sanguinary affair, and especially interest- 
ing as showing one of Peter's peculiarities, which 
was that in the middle of a fight he would sud- 
denly change sides. At the Gulch, when victory 
was still in the balance, sometimes leaning this 
way and sometimes that, he called out, "I'm red- 
skin to-day; what are you, Tootles?" And 
Tootles answered, e 'Redskin; what are you, 
Nibs?" and Nibs said, "Redskin; what are you, 
Twin?" and so on; and they were all redskin; and 
of course this would have ended the fight had not 

9 8 



THE HOME UNDER THE GROUND 

the real redskins, fascinated by Peter's methods, 
agreed to be lost boys for that once, and so at it 
they all went again, more fiercely than ever. 

The extraordinary upshot of this adventure was 
— but we have not decided yet that this is the ad- 
venture we are to narrate. Perhaps a better one 
would be the night attack by the redskins on the 
house under the ground, when several of them 
stuck in the hollow trees and had to be pulled out 
like corks. Or we might tell how Peter saved 
Tiger Lily's life in the Mermaids' Lagoon, and so 
made her his ally. 

Or we could tell of that cake the pirates cooked 
so that the boys might eat it and perish ; and how 
they placed it in one cunning spot after another; 
but always Wendy snatched it from the hands of 
her children, so that in time it lost its succulence, 
and became as hard as a stone, and was used as a 
missile, and Hook fell over it in the dark. 

Or suppose we tell of the birds that were Peter's 
friends, particularly of the Never bird that built 
in a tree overhanging the lagoon, and how the nest 
fell into the water, and still the bird sat on her 
eggs, and Peter gave orders that she was not to be 
disturbed. That is a pretty story, and the end 
shows how grateful a bird can be; but if we tell it 
we must also tell the whole adventure of the la- 
goon, which would of course be telling two adven- 
tures rather than just one. A shorter adventure, 

99 



PETER AND WENDY 

and quite as exciting, was Tinker Bell's attempt, 
with the help of some street fairies, to have the 
sleeping Wendy conveyed on a great floating leaf 
to the mainland. Fortunately the leaf gave way 
and Wendy woke, thinking it was bath-time, and 
swam back. Or again, we might choose Peter's 
defiance of the lions, when he drew a circle round 
him on the ground with an arrow and dared them 
to cross it; and though he waited for hours, with 
the other boys and Wendy looking on breathlessly 
from trees, not one of them would accept his 
challenge. 

Which of these adventures shall we choose? 
The best way will be to toss for it. 

I have tossed, and the lagoon has won. This 
almost makes one wish that the gulch or the cake 
or Tink's leaf had won. Of course I could do it 
again, and make it best out of three ; however, per- 
haps fairest to stick to the lagoon. 



100 



CHAPTER VIII 

THE MERMAIDS' LAGOON 

If you shut your eyes and are a lucky one, you 
may see at times a shapeless pool of lovely pale 
colours suspended in the darkness; then if you 
squeeze your eyes tighter, the pool begins to take 
shape, and the colours become so vivid that with 
another squeeze they must go on fire. But just 
before they go on fire you see the lagoon. This is 
the nearest you ever get to it on the mainland, just 
one heavenly moment; if there could be two mo- 
ments you might see the surf and hear the mer- 
maids singing. 

The children often spent long summer days on 
this lagoon, swimming or floating most of the 
time, playing the mermaid games in the water, 
and so forth. You must not think from this that 
the mermaids were on friendly terms with them: 
on the contrary, it was among Wendy's lasting 
regrets that all the time she was on the island she 
never had a civil word from one of them. When 
she stole softly to the edge of the lagoon she might 

101 



PETER AND WENDY 

see them by the score, especially on Marooners' 
Rock, where they loved to bask, combing out their 
hair in a lazy way that quite irritated her; or she 
might even swim, on tiptoe as it were, to within a 
yard of them, but then they saw her and dived, 
probably splashing her with their tails, not by ac- 
cident, but intentionally. 

They treated all the boys in the same way, ex- 
cept of course Peter, who chatted with them on 
Marooners' Rock by the hour and sat on their tails 
when they got cheeky. He gave Wendy one of 
their combs. 

The most haunting time at which to see them is 
at the turn of the moon, when they utter strange 
wailing cries ; but the lagoon is dangerous for mor- 
tals then, and until the evening of which we have 
now to tell, Wendy had never seen the lagoon by 
moonlight, less from fear, for of course Peter 
would have accompanied her, than because she had 
strict rules about every one being in bed by seven. 
She was often at the lagoon, however, on sunny 
days after rain, when the mermaids come up in 
extraordinary numbers to play with their bubbles. 
The bubbles of many colours made in rainbow 
water they treat as balls, hitting them gaily from 
one to another with their tails, and trying to keep 
them in the rainbow till they burst. The goals are 
at each end of the rainbow, and the keepers only 
are allowed to use their hands. Sometimes a dozen 

102 



THE MERMAIDS' LAGOON 

of these games will be going on in the lagoon at a 
time, and it is quite a pretty sight. 

But the moment the children tried to join in 
they had to play by themselves, for the mermaids 
immediately disappeared. Nevertheless we have 
proof that they secretly watched the interlopers, 
and were not above taking an idea from them ; for 
John introduced a new way of hitting the bubble, 
with the head instead of the hand, and the mer- 
maids adopted it. This is the one mark that John 
has left on the Neverland. 

It must also have been rather pretty to see the 
children resting on a rock for half an hour after 
their mid-day meal. Wendy insisted on their 
doing this, and it had to be a real rest even though 
the meal was make-believe. So they lay there in 
the sun, and their bodies glistened in it, while she 
sat beside them and looked important. 

It was one such day, and they were all on 
Marooners' Rock. The rock was not much larger 
than their great bed, but of course they all knew 
how not to take up much room, and they were 
dozing or at least lying with their eyes shut, and 
pinching occasionally when they thought Wendy 
was not looking. She was very busy stitching. 

While she stitched a change came to the lagoon. 
Little shivers ran over it, and the sun went away 
and shadows stole across the water, turning it cold. 
Wendy could no longer see to thread her needle, 

103 



PETER AND WENDY 

and when she looked up, the lagoon that had al- 
ways hitherto been such a laughing place seemed 
formidable and unfriendly. 

It was not, she knew, that night had come, but 
something as dark as night had come. No, worse 
than that. It had not come, but it had sent that 
shiver through the sea to say that it was coming. 
What was it? 

There crowded upon her all the stories she had 
been told of Marooners' Rock, so called because 
evil captains put sailors on it and leave them there 
to drown. They drown when the tide rises, for 
then it is submerged. 

Of cc arse she should have roused the children at 
once ; not merely because of the unknown that was 
stalking toward them, but because it was no longer 
good for them to sleep on a rock grown chilly. But 
she was a young mother and she did not know this; 
she thought you simply must stick to your rule 
about half an hour after the mid-day meal. So, 
though fear was upon her, and she longed to hear 
male voices, she would not waken them. Even 
when she heard the sound of muffled oars, though 
her heart was in her mouth, she did not waken 
them. She stood over them to let them have their 
sleep out. Was it not brave of Wendy? 

It was well for those boys then that there was 
one among them who could sniff danger even in his 
sleep. Peter sprang erect, as wide awake at once 

104 



THE MERMAIDS' LAGOON 

as a dog, and with one warning cry he roused the 
others. 

He stood motionless, one hand to his ear. 

"Pirates !" he cried. The others came closer to 
him. A strange smile was playing about his face, 
and Wendy saw it and shuddered. While that 
smile was on his face no one dared address him; 
all they could do was to stand ready to obey. The 
order came sharp and incisive. 

"Dive!" 

There was a gleam of legs, and instantly the 
lagoon seemed deserted. Marooners' Rock stood 
alone in the forbidding waters, as if it were itself 
marooned. 

The boat drew nearer. It was the pirate dinghy, 
with three figures in her, Smee and Starkey, and 
the third a captive, no other than Tiger Lily. Her 
hands and ankles were tied, and she knew what 
was to be her fate. She was to be left on the rock 
to perish, an end to one of her race more terrible 
than death by fire or torture, for is it not written 
in the book of the tribe that there is no path 
through water to the happy hunting-ground? Yet 
her face was impassive; she was the daughter of a 
chief, she must die as a chief's daughter, it is 
enough. 

They had caught her boarding the pirate ship 
with a knife in her mouth. No watch was kept on 
the ship, it being Hook's boast that the wind of his 

105 



PETER AND WENDY 

name guarded the ship for a mile around. Now 
her fate would help to guard it also. One more 
wail would go the round in that wind by night. 

In the gloom that they brought with them the two 
pirates did not see the rock till they crashed into it. 

"Luff, you lubber," cried an Irish voice that was 
Smee's; "here's the rock. Now, then, what we 
have to do is to hoist the redskin on to it and leave 
her there to drown." 

It was the work of one brutal moment to land 
the beautiful girl on the rock; she was too proud to 
offer a vain resistance. 

Quite near the rock, but out of sight, two heads 
were bobbing up and down, Peter's and Wendy's. 
Wendy was crying, for it was the first tragedy she 
had seen. Peter had seen many tragedies, but he 
had forgotten them all. He was less sorry than 
Wendy for Tiger Lily : it was two against one that 
angered him, and he meant to save her. An easy 
way would have been to wait until the pirates had 
gone, but he was never one to choose the easy way. 

There was almost nothing he could not do, and 
he now imitated the voice of Hook. 

"Ahoy there, you lubbers!" he called. It was 
a marvellous imitation. 

"The captain!" said the pirates, staring at each 
other in surprise. 

"He must be swimming out to us," Starkey said, 
when they had looked for him in vain. 

106 



THE MERMAIDS' LAGOON 

"We are putting the redskin on the rock," Smee 
called out. 

"Set her free," came the astonishing answer. 

"Free!" 

"Yes, cut her bonds and let her go." 

"But, captain " 

"At once, d'ye hear," cried Peter, "or I'll plunge 
my hook in you." 

"This is queer!" Smee gasped. 

"Better do what the captain orders," said 
Starkey nervously. 

"Ay, ay," Smee said, and he cut Tiger Lily's 
cords. At once like an eel she slid between 
Starkey's legs into the water. 

Of course Wendy was very elated over Peter's 
cleverness; but she knew that he would be elated 
also and very likely crow and thus betray himself, 
so at once her hand went out to cover his mouth. 
But it was stayed even in the act, for "Boat 
ahoy !" rang over the lagoon in Hook's voice, but 
this time it was not Peter who had spoken. 

Peter may have been about to crow, but his face 
puckered in a whistle of surprise instead. 

"Boat ahoy!" again came the voice. 

Now Wendy understood. The real Hook was 
also in the water. 

He was swimming to the boat, and as his men 
showed a light to guide him he had soon reached 
them. In the light of the lantern Wendy saw his 

107 



PETER AND WENDY 

hook grip the boat's side; she saw his evil swarthy 
face as he rose dripping from the water, and, 
quaking, she would have liked to swim away, but 
Peter would not budge. He was tingling with 
life and also top-heavy with conceit. "Am I not 
a wonder, oh, I am a wonder!" he whispered to 
her, and though she thought so also, she was really 
glad for the sake of his reputation that no one 
heard him except herself. 

He signed to her to listen. 

The two pirates were very curious to know what 
had brought their captain to them, but he sat with 
his head on his hook in a position of profound 
melancholy. 

"Captain, is all well?" they asked timidly, but 
he answered with a hollow moan. 

"He sighs," said Smee. 

"He sighs again," said Starkey. 

"And yet a third time he sighs," said Smee. 

"What's up, captain?" 

Then at last he spoke passionately. 

"The game's up," he cried, "those boys have 
found a mother." 

Affrighted though she was, Wendy swelled with 
pride. 

"O evil day!" cried Starkey. 

"What's a mother?" asked the ignorant Smee. 

Wendy was so shocked that she exclaimed, "He 
doesn't know!" and always after this she felt that 

108 



THE MERMAIDS 5 LAGOON 

if you could have a pet pirate Smee would be her 
one. 

Peter pulled her beneath the water, for Hook 
had started up, crying, "What was that?" 

"I heard nothing," said Starkey, raising the lan- 
tern over the waters, and as the pirates looked they 
saw a strange sight. It was the nest I have told 
you of, floating on the lagoon, and the Never bird 
was sitting on it. 

"See," said Hook in answer to Smee's question, 
"that is a mother. What a lesson ! The nest must 
have fallen into the water, but would the mother 
desert her eggs? No." 

There was a break in his voice, as if for a mo- 
ment he recalled innocent days when — but he 
brushed away this weakness with his hook. 

Smee, much impressed, gazed at the bird as the 
nest was borne past, but the more suspicious 
Starkey said, "If she is a mother, perhaps she is 
hanging about here to help Peter." 

Hook winced. "Ay," he said, "that is the fear 
that haunts me." 

He was roused from this dejection by Smee's 
eager voice. 

"Captain," said Smee, "could we not kidnap 
these boys' mother and make her our mother?" 

"It is a princely scheme," cried Hook, and at 
once it took practical shape in his great brain. 
"We will seize the children and carry them to the 

109 



PETER AND WENDY 

boat: the boys we will make walk the plank, and 
Wendy shall be our mother." 

Again Wendy forgot herself. 

"Never!" she cried, and bobbed. 

"What was that?" 

But they could see nothing. They thought it 
must have been but a leaf in the wind. "Do you 
agree, my bullies?" asked Hook. 

"There is my hand on it," they both said. 

"And there is my hook. Swear." 

They all swore. By this time they were on the 
rock, and suddenly Hook remembered Tiger Lily. 

"Where is the redskin?" he demanded abruptly. 

He had a playful humour at moments, and they 
thought this was one of the moments. 

"That is all right, captain," Smee answered 
complacently; "we let her go." 

"Let her go!" cried Hook. 

" 'Twas your own orders," the bo'sun faltered. 

"You called over the water to us to let her go," 
said Starkey. 

"Brimstone and gall," thundered Hook, "what 
cozening is here!" His face had gone black with 
rage, but he saw that they believed their words, 
and he was startled. "Lads," he said, shaking a 
little, "I gave no such order." 

"It is passing queer," Smee said, and they all 
fidgeted uncomfortably. Hook raised his voice, 
but there was a quiver in it. 

no 



THE MERMAIDS' LAGOON 

"Spirit that haunts this dark lagoon to-night," 
he cried, "dost hear me?" 

Of course Peter should have kept quiet, but of 
course he did not. He immediately answered in 
Hook's voice : 

"Odds, bobs, hammer and tongs, I hear you." 

In that supreme moment Hook did not blanch, 
even at the gills, but Smee and Starkey clung to 
each other in terror. 

"Who are you, stranger, speak?" Hook de- 
manded. 

"I am James Hook," replied the voice, "captain 
of the Jolly Roger," 

"You are not; you are not," Hook cried 
hoarsely. 

"Brimstone and gall," the voice retorted, "say 
that again, and Pll cast anchor in you." 

Hook tried a more ingratiating manner. "If 
you are Hook," he said almost humbly, "come tell 
me, who am I?" 

"A codfish," replied the voice, "only a codfish." 

"A codfish !" Hook echoed blankly, and it was 
then, but not till then, that his proud spirit broke. 
He saw his men draw back from him. 

"Have we been captained all this time by a cod- 
fish!" they muttered. "It is lowering to our 
pride." 

They were his dogs snapping at him, but, tragic 
figure though he had become, he scarcely heeded 

ill 



PETER AND WENDY 

them. Against such fearful evidence it was not 
their belief in him that he needed, it was his own. 
He felt his ego slipping from him. "Don't desert 
me, bully," he whispered hoarsely to it. 

In his dark nature there was a touch of the 
feminine, as in all the greatest pirates, and it some- 
times gave him intuitions. Suddenly he tried the 
guessing game. 

"Hook," he called, "have you another voice?" 

Now Peter could never resist a game, and he 
answered blithely in his own voice, "I have." 

"And another name?" 

"Ay, ay." 

"Vegetable?" asked Hook. 

"No." 

"Mineral?" 

"No." 

"Animal?" 

"Yes." 

"Man?" 

"No !" This answer rang out scornfully. 

"Boy?" 

"Yes." 

"Ordinary boy?" 

"No!" 

"Wonderful boy?" 

To Wendy's pain the answer that rang out this 
time was "Yes." 

"Are you in England?" 

112 



THE MERMAIDS' LAGOON 

"No." 

"Are you here?" 

"Yes." 

Hook was completely puzzled. "You ask him 
some questions," he said to the others, wiping his 
damp brow. 

Smee reflected. "I can't think of a thing," he 
said regretfully. 

"Can't guess, can't guess!" crowed Peter. "Do 
you give it up?" 

Of course in his pride he was carrying the game 
too far, and the miscreants saw their chance. 

"Yes, yes," they answered eagerly. 

"Well, then," he cried, "I am Peter Pan!" 

Pan! 

In a moment Hook was himself again, and Smee 
and Starkey were his faithful henchmen. 

"Now we have him," Hook shouted. "Into the 
water, Smee. Starkey, mind the boat. Take him 
dead or alive !" 

He leaped as he spoke, and simultaneously came 
the gay voice of Peter. 

"Are you ready, boys?" 

"Ay, ay," from various parts of the lagoon. 

"Then lam into the pirates." 

The fight was short and sharp. First to draw 
blood was John, who gallantly climbed into the 
boat and held Starkey. There was a fierce strug- 
gle, in which the cutlass was torn from the pirate's 

113 



PETER AND WENDY 

grasp. He wriggled overboard and John leapt 
after him. The dinghy drifted away. 

Here and there a head bobbed up in the water, 
and there was a flash of steel followed by a cry or 
a whoop. In the confusion some struck at their 
own side. The corkscrew of Smee got Tootles in 
the fourth rib, but he was himself pinked in turn 
by Curly. Farther from the rock Starkey was 
pressing Slightly and the twins hard. 

Where all this time was Peter? He was seeking 
bigger game. 

The others were all brave boys, and they must 
not be blamed for backing from the pirate captain. 
His iron claw made a circle of dead water round 
him, from which they fled like affrighted fishes. 

But there was one who did not fear him: there 
was one prepared to enter that circle. 

Strangely, it was not in the water that they met. 
Hook rose to the rock to breathe, and at the same 
moment Peter scaled it on the opposite side. The 
rock was slippery as a ball, and they had to crawl 
rather than climb. Neither knew that the other 
was coming. Each feeling for a grip met the 
other's arm: in surprise they raised their heads; 
their faces were almost touching; so they met. 

Some of the greatest heroes have confessed that 
just before they fell to they had a sinking. Had 
it been so with Peter at that moment I would ad- 
mit it. After all, this was the only man that the 

114 



THE MERMAIDS' LAGOON 

Sea-Cook had feared. But Peter had no sinking, 
he had one feeling only, gladness; and he gnashed 
his pretty teeth with joy. Quick as thought he 
snatched a knife from Hook's belt and was about 
to drive it home, when he saw that he was higher 
up the rock than his foe. It would not have been 
fighting fair. He gave the pirate a hand to help 
him up. 

It was then that Hook bit him. 

Not the pain of this but its unfairness was what 
dazed Peter. It made him quite helpless. He 
could only stare, horrified. Every child is affected 
thus the first time he is treated unfairly. All he 
thinks he has a right to when he comes to you to 
be yours is fairness. After you have been unfair 
to him he will love you again, but he will never 
afterwards be quite the same boy. No one ever 
gets over the first unfairness ; no one except Peter. 
He often met it, but he always forgot it. I sup- 
pose that was the real difference between him and 
all the rest. 

So when he met it now it was like the first time ; 
and he could just stare, helpless. Twice the iron 
hand clawed him. 

A few minutes afterwards the other boys saw 
Hook in the water striking wildly for the ship ; no 
elation on his pestilent face now, only white fear, 
for the crocodile was in dogged pursuit of him. On 
ordinary occasions the boys would have swum 

115 



PETER AND WENDY 

alongside cheering; but now they were uneasy, for 
they had lost both Peter and Wendy, and were 
scouring the lagoon for them, calling them by 
name. They found the dinghy and went home in 
it, shouting "Peter, Wendy" as they went, but no 
answer came save mocking laughter from the mer- 
maids. "They must be swimming back or flying," 
the boys concluded. They were not very anxious, 
they had such faith in Peter. They chuckled, boy- 
like, because they would be late for bed; and it 
was all mother Wendy's fault ! 

When their voices died away there came cold 
silence over the lagoon, and then a feeble cry. 

"Help, help!" 

Two small figures were beating against the rock; 
the girl had fainted and lay on the boy's arm. 
With a last effort Peter pulled her up the rock and 
then lay down beside her. Even as he also fainted 
he saw that the water was rising. He knew that 
they would soon be drowned, but he could do no 
more. 

As they lay side by side a mermaid caught 
Wendy by the feet, and began pulling her softly 
into the water. Peter, feeling her slip from him, 
woke with a start, and was just in time to draw 
her back. But he had to tell her the truth. 

"We are on the rock, Wendy," he said, "but it 
is growing smaller. Soon the water will be over 
it." 

116 



THE MERMAIDS' LAGOON 

She did not understand even now. 

"We must go," she said, almost brightly. 

"Yes," he answered faintly. 

"Shall we swim or fly, Peter?" 

He had to tell her. 

"Do you think you could swim or fly as far as 
the island, Wendy, without my help?" 

She had to admit that she was too tired. 

He moaned. 

"What is it?" she asked, anxious about him at 
once. 

"I can't help you, Wendy. Hook wounded me. 
I can neither fly nor swim." 

"Do you mean we shall both be drowned?" 

"Look how the water is rising." 

They put their hands over their eyes to shut out 
the sight. They thought they would soon be no 
more. As they sat thus something brushed against 
Peter as light as a kiss, and stayed there, as if say- 
ing timidly, "Can I be of any use?" 

It was the tail of a kite, which Michael had 
made some days before. It had torn itself out of 
his hand and floated away. 

"Michael's kite," Peter said without interest, 
but next moment he had seized the tail, and was 
pulling the kite toward him. 

"It lifted Michael off the ground," he cried; 
"why should it not carry you?" 

"Both of us!" 

117 



PETER AND WENDY 

"It can't lift two; Michael and Curly tried." 

"Let us draw lots," Wendy said bravely. 

"And you a lady; never." Already he had tied 
the tail round her. She clung to him ; she refused 
to go without him; but with a "Good-bye, 
Wendy," he pushed her from the rock; and in a 
few minutes she was borne out of his sight. Peter 
was alone on the lagoon. 

The rock was very small now; soon it would be 
submerged. Pale rays of light tiptoed across the 
waters; and by and by there was to be heard a 
sound at once the most musical and the most 
melancholy in the world: the mermaids calling to 
the moon. 

Peter was not quite like other boys; but he was 
afraid at last. A tremor ran through him, like a 
shudder passing over the sea; but on the sea one 
shudder follows another till there are hundreds of 
them, and Peter felt just the one. Next moment 
he was standing erect on the rock again, with that 
smile on his face and a drum beating within him. 
It was saying, "To die will be an awfully big ad- 
venture." 



118 



CHAPTER IX 

THE NEVER BIRD 

The last sounds Peter heard before he was quite 
alone were the mermaids retiring one by one to 
their bedchambers under the sea. He was too far 
away to hear their doors shut; but every door in 
the coral caves where they live rings a tiny bell 
when it opens or closes (as in all the nicest houses 
on the mainland), and he heard the bells. 

Steadily the waters rose till they were nibbling 
at his feet; and to pass the time until they made 
their final gulp, he watched the only thing moving 
on the lagoon. He thought it was a piece of float- 
ing paper, perhaps part of the kite, and wondered 
idly how long it would take to drift ashore. 

Presently he noticed as an odd thing that it was 
undoubtedly out upon the lagoon with some defi- 
nite purpose, for it was fighting the tide, and 
sometimes winning; and when it won, Peter, al- 
ways sympathetic to the weaker side, could not 
help clapping; it was such a gallant piece of paper. 

It was not really a piece of paper; it was the 
Never bird, making desperate efforts to reach 

119 



PETER AND WENDY 

Peter on her nest. By working her wings, in a 
way she had learned since the nest fell into the 
water, she was able to some extent to guide her 
strange craft, but by the time Peter recognised her 
she was very exhausted. She had come to save 
him, to give him her nest, though there were eggs 
in it. I rather wonder at the bird, for though he 
had been nice to her, he had also sometimes tor- 
mented her. I can suppose only that, like Mrs. 
Darling and the rest of them, she was melted be- 
cause he had all his first teeth. 

She called out to him what she had come for, 
and he called out to her what was she doing there; 
but of course neither of them understood the 
other's language. In fanciful stories people can 
talk to the birds freely, and I wish for the moment 
I could pretend that this was such a story, and say 
that Peter replied intelligently to the Never bird ; 
but truth is best, and I want to tell only what 
really happened. Well, not only could they not 
understand each other, but they forgot their man- 
ners. 

"I — want — you — to — get — into — the — nest," 
the bird called, speaking as slowly and distinctly 
as possible, "and — then — you — can — drift — 
ashore, but— I— am— too— tired— to— bring— it 
—any — nearer — so — you — must — try — to — swim 
—to— it." 

"What are you quacking about?" Peter an- 

120 



THE NEVER BIRD 

swered. "Why don't you let the nest drift as 
usual?" 

"I — want — you — " the bird said, and repeated 
it all over. 

Then Peter tried slow and distinct. 
' 'What — are — you — quacking — about ?" and 
so on. 

The Never bird became irritated; they have 
very short tempers. 

"You dunderheaded little jay," she screamed, 
"why don't you do as I tell you?" 

Peter felt that she was calling him names, and 
at a venture he retorted hotly : 

"So are you!" 

Then rather curiously they both snapped out 
the same remark. 

"Shut up!" 

"Shut up!" 

Nevertheless the bird was determined to save 
him if she could, and by one last mighty effort she 
propelled the nest against the rock. Then up she 
flew ; deserting her eggs, so as to make her meaning 
clear. 

Then at last he understood, and clutched the 
nest and waved his thanks to the bird as she flut- 
tered overhead. It was not to receive his thanks, 
however, that she hung there in the sky; it was not 
even to watch him get into the nest; it was to see 
what he did with her eggs. 

121 



PETER AND WENDY 

There were two large white eggs, and Peter 
lifted them up and reflected. The bird covered 
her face with her wings, so as not to see the last of 
them ; but she could not help peeping between the 
feathers. 

I forget whether I have told you that there was 
a stave on the rock, driven into it by some buc- 
caneers of long ago to mark the site of buried 
treasure. The children had discovered the glitter- 
ing hoard, and when in mischievous mood used to 
fling showers of moidores, diamonds, pearls and 
pieces of eight to the gulls, who pounced upon 
them for food, and then flew away, raging at the 
scurvy trick that had been played upon them. The 
stave was still there, and on it Starkey had hung 
his hat, a deep tarpaulin, watertight, with a broad 
brim. Peter put the eggs into this hat and set it 
on the lagoon. It floated beautifully. 

The Never bird saw at once what he was up to, 
and screamed her admiration of him; and, alas, 
Peter crowed his agreement with her. Then he 
got into the nest, reared the stave in it as a mast, 
and hung up his shirt for a sail. At the same mo- 
ment the bird fluttered down upon the hat and 
once more sat snugly on her eggs. She drifted in 
one direction, and he was borne off in another, both 
cheering. 

Of course when Peter landed he beached his 
barque in a place where the bird would easily find 

122 



THE NEVER BIRD 

it; but the hat was such a great success that she 
abandoned the nest. It drifted about till it went 
to pieces, and often Starkey came to the shore of 
the lagoon, and with many bitter feelings watched 
the bird sitting on his hat. As we shall not see her 
again, it may be worth mentioning here that all 
Never birds now build in that shape of nest, with 
a broad brim on which the youngsters take an 
airing. 

Great were the rejoicings when Peter reached 
the home under the ground almost as soon as 
Wendy, who had been carried hither and thither 
by the kite. Every boy had adventures to tell ; but 
perhaps the biggest adventure of all was that they 
were several hours late for bed. This so inflated 
them that they did various dodgy things to get 
staying up still longer, such as demanding ban- 
dages; but Wendy, though glorying in having 
them all home again safe and sound, was scandal- 
ised by the lateness of the hour, and cried, "To 
bed, to bed," in a voice that had to be obeyed. 
Next day, however, she was awfully tender, and 
gave out bandages to every one, and they played 
till bed-time at limping about and carrying their 
arms in slings. 



123 



CHAPTER X 

THE HAPPY HOME 

One important result of the brush on the lagoon 
was that it made the redskins their friends. Peter 
had saved Tiger Lily from a dreadful fate, and 
now there was nothing she and her braves would 
not do for him. All night they sat above, keeping 
watch over the home under the ground and await- 
ing the big attack by the pirates which obviously 
could not be much longer delayed. Even by day 
they hung about, smoking the pipe of peace, and 
looking almost as if they wanted tit-bits to eat. 

They called Peter the Great White Father, 
prostrating themselves before him; and he liked 
this tremendously, so that it was not really good 
for him. 

"The great white father," he would say to them 
in a very lordly manner, as they grovelled at his 
feet, "is glad to see the Piccaninny warriors pro- 
tecting his wigwam from the pirates." 

"Me Tiger Lily," that lovely creature would 
reply, "Peter Pan save me, me his velly nice 
friend. Me no let pirates hurt him." 

12 < 



THE HAPPY HOME 

She was far too pretty to cringe in this way, but 
Peter thought it his due, and he would answer con- 
descendingly, "It is good. Peter Pan has spoken." 

Always when he said, "Peter Pan has spoken," 
it meant that they must now shut up, and they 
accepted it humbly in that spirit ; but they were by 
no means so respectful to the other boys, whom 
they looked upon as just ordinary braves. They 
said "How-do?" to them, and things like that; 
and what annoyed the boys was that Peter seemed 
to think this all right. 

Secretly Wendy sympathised with them a little, 
but she was far too loyal a housewife to listen to 
any complaints against father. "Father knows 
best," she always said, whatever her private opin- 
ion must be. Her private opinion was that the 
redskins should not call her a squaw. 

We have now reached the evening that was to be 
known among them as the Night of Nights, be- 
cause of its adventures and their upshot. The 
day, as if quietly gathering its forces, had been 
almost uneventful, and now the redskins in their 
blankets were at their posts above, while, below, 
the children were having their evening meal; all 
except Peter, who had gone out to get the time. 
The way you got the time on the island was to find 
the crocodile, and then stay near him till the clock 
struck. 

This meal happened to be a make-believe tea, 
125 



PETER AND WENDY 

and they sat round the board, guzzling in their 
greed; and really, what with their chatter and 
recriminations, the noise, as Wendy said, was posi- 
tively deafening. To be sure, she did not mind 
noise, but she simply would not have them grab- 
bing things, and then excusing themselves by say- 
ing that Tootles had pushed their elbow. There 
was a fixed rule that they must never hit back at 
meals, but should refer the matter of dispute to 
Wendy by raising the right arm politely and say- 
ing, "I complain of so-and-so" ; but what usually 
happened was that they forgot to do this or did it 
too much. 

"Silence," cried Wendy when for the twentieth 
time she had told them that they were not all to 
speak at once. "Is your mug empty, Slightly 
darling?" 

"Not quite empty, mummy," Slightly said, after 
looking into an imaginary mug. 

"He hasn't even begun to drink his milk," Nibs 
interposed. 

This was telling, and Slightly seized his chance. 

"I complain of Nibs," he cried promptly. 

John, however, had held up his hand first. 

"Well, John?" 

"May I sit in Peter's chair, as he is not here?" 

"Sit in father's chair, John!" Wendy was 
scaiKlalised. "Certainly not." 

"He is not really our father," John answered. 
126 



THE HAPPY HOME 

"He didn't even know how a father does till I 
showed him." 

This was grumbling. "We complain of John," 
cried the twins. 

Tootles held up his hand. He was so much the 
humblest of them, indeed he was the only humble 
one, that Wendy was specially gentle with him. 

"I don't suppose," Tootles said diffidently, 
"that I could be father." 

"No, Tootles." 

Once Tootles began, which was not very often, 
he had a silly way of going on. 

"As I can't be father," he said heavily, "I don't 
suppose, Michael, you would let me be baby?" 

"No, I won't," Michael rapped out. He was 
already in his basket. 

"As I can't be baby," Tootles said, getting 
heavier and heavier, "do you think I could be a 
twin?" 

"No, indeed," replied the twins; "it's awfully 
difficult to be a twin." 

"As I can't be anything important," said 
Tootles, "would any of you like to see me do a 
trick?" 

"No," they all replied. 

Then at last he stopped. "I hadn't really any 
hope," he said. 

The hateful telling broke out again. 

"Slightly is coughing on the table." 
127 



PETER AND WENDY 

"The twins began with cheese-cakes." 

"Curly is taking both butter and honey." 

"Nibs is speaking with his month full." 

"I complain of the twins." 

"I complain of Curly." 

"I complain of Nibs." 

"Oh dear, oh dear," cried Wendy, "I'm sure I 
sometimes think that spinsters are to be envied." 

She told them to clear away, and sat down to 
her work-basket, a heavy load of stockings and 
every knee with a hole in it as usual. 

"Wendy," remonstrated Michael, "I'm too big 
for a cradle." 

"I must have somebody in a cradle," she said 
almost tartly, "and you are the littlest. A cradle 
is such a nice homely thing to have about a 
house." 

While she sewed they played around her; such 
a group of happy faces and dancing limbs lit up 
by that romantic fire. It had become a very fa- 
miliar scene this in the home under the ground, 
but we are looking on it for the last time. 

There was a step above, and Wendy, you may 
be sure, was the first to recognise it. 

"Children, I hear your father's step. He likes 
you to meet him at the door." 

Above, the redskins crouched before Peter. 

"Watch well, braves. I have spoken." 

And then, as so often before, the gay children 

128 



THE HAPPY HOME 

dragged him from his tree. As so often before* 
but never again. 

He had brought nuts for the boys as well as the 
correct time for Wendy. 

"Peter, you just spoil them, you know," Wendy 
simpered. 

"Ah, old lady," said Peter, hanging up his gun. 

"It was me told him mothers are called old 
lady," Michael whispered to Curly. 

"I complain of Michael," said Curly instantly.. 

The first twin came to Peter. "Father, we want 
to dance." 

"Dance away, my little man," said Peter, who 
was in high good humour. 

"But we want you to dance." 

Peter was really the best dancer among them,, 
but he pretended to be scandalised. 

"Me ! My old bones would rattle !" 

"And mummy too." 

"What!" cried Wendy, "the mother of such an 
armful, dance !" 

"But on a Saturday night," Slightly insinuated. 

It was not really Saturday night, at least it may 
have been, for they had long lost count of the 
days; but always if they wanted to do anything 
special they said this was Saturday night, and then 
they did it. 

"Of course it is Saturday night, Peter," Wendy- 
said, relenting. 

129 



PETER AND WENDY 

"People of our figure, Wendy!" 

"But it is only among our own progeny." 

"True, true." 

So they were told they could dance, but they 
must put on their nighties first. 

"Ah, old lady," Peter said aside to Wendy, 
warming himself by the fire and looking down at 
her as she sat turning a heel, "there is nothing 
more pleasant of an evening for you and me when 
the day's toil is over than to rest by the fire with 
the little ones near by." 

"It is sweet, Peter, isn't it?" Wendy said, 
frightfully gratified. "Peter, I think Curly has 
your nose." 

"Michael takes after you." 

She went to him and put her hand on his shoul- 
der. 

"Dear Peter," she said, "with such a large fam- 
ily, of course, I have now passed my best, but you 
don't want to change me, do you?" 

"No, Wendy." 

Certainly he did not want a change, but he 
looked at her uncomfortably, blinking, you know, 
like one not sure whether he was awake or asleep. 

"Peter, what is it?" 

"I was just thinking," he said, a little scared. 
"It is only make-believe, isn't it, that I am their 
father?" 

"Oh yes," Wendy said primly. 
130 



THE HAPPY HOME 

"You see, "he continued apologetically, "it would 
make me seem so old to be their real father." 

"But they are ours, Peter, yours and mine." 

"But not really, Wendy?" he asked anxiously. 

"Not if you don't wish it," she replied; and she 
distinctly heard his sigh of relief. "Peter," she 
asked, trying to speak firmly, "what are your exact 
feelings to me?" 

"Those of a devoted son, Wendy." 

"I thought so," she said, and went and sat by 
herself at the extreme end of the room. 

"You are so queer," he said, frankly puzzled, 
"and Tiger Lily is just the same. There is some- 
thing she wants to be to me, but she says it is not 
my mother." 

"No, indeed, it is not," Wendy replied with 
frightful emphasis. Now we know why she was 
prejudiced against the redskins. 

"Then what is it?" 

"It isn't for a lady to tell." 

"Oh, very well," Peter said, a little nettled. 
"Perhaps Tinker Bell will tell me." 

"Oh yes, Tinker Bell will tell you," Wendy 
retorted scornfully. "She is an abandoned little 
creature." 

Here Tink, who was in her bedroom, eaves- 
dropping, squeaked out something impudent. 

"She says she glories in being abandoned," 
Peter interpreted. 

131 



PETER AND WENDY 

He had a sudden idea. "Perhaps Tink wants 
to be my mother?" 

"You silly ass!" cried Tinktr Bell in a pas- 
sion. 

She had said it so often that Wendy needed 
no translation. 

"I almost agree with her," Wendy snapped. 
Fancy Wendy snapping ! But she had been much 
tried, and she little knew what was to happen be- 
fore the night was out. If she had known she 
would not have snapped. 

None of them knew. Perhaps it was best not 
to know. Their ignorance gave them one more 
glad hour; and as it was to be their last hour on 
the island, let us rejoice that there were sixty glad 
minutes in it. They sang and danced in their 
night-gowns. Such a deliciously creepy song it 
was, in which they pretended to be frightened at 
their own shadows, little witting that so soon 
shadows would close in upon them, from whom 
they would shrink in real fear. So uproariously 
gay was the dance, and how they buffeted each 
other on the bed and out of it ! It was a pillow 
fight rather than a dance, and when it was fin- 
ished, the pillows insisted on one bout more, like 
partners who know that they may never meet 
again. The stories they told, before it was time 
for Wendy's good-night story! Even Slightly 
tried to tell a story that night, and the beginning 

132 



THE HAPPY HOME 

was so fearfully dull that it appalled not only the 
others but himself, and he said happily: 

"Yes, it is a dull beginning. I say, let us pre- 
tend that it is the end." 

And then at last they all got into bed for 
Wendy's story, the story they loved best, the story 
Peter hated. Usually when she began to tell this 
story, he left the room or put his hands over his 
ears; and possibly if he had done either of those 
things this time they might all still be on the 
island. But to-night he remained on his stool; 
and we shall see what happened. 



133 



CHAPTER XI 

wendy's story 

"Listen, then," said Wendy, settling down to her 
story, with Michael at her feet and seven boys in 
the bed. "There was once a gentleman " 

"I had rather he had been a lady," Curly said. 

"I wish he had been a white rat," said Nibs. 

"Quiet," their mother admonished them. 
"There was a lady also, and " 

"O mummy," cried the first twin, "you mean 
that there is a lady also, don't you? She is not 
dead, is she?" 

"Oh no." 

"I am awfully glad she isn't dead," said 
Tootles. "Are you glad, John?" 

"Of course I am." 

"Are you glad, Nibs?" 

"Rather." 

"Are you glad, Twins?" 

"We are just glad." 

"Oh dear," sighed Wendy. 

"Little less noise there," Peter called out, de- 
termined that she should have fair play, however 
beastly a story it might be in his opinion. 

134 




wendy's story 



WENDY'S STORY 

"The gentleman's name," Wendy continued, 
"was Mr. Darling, and her name was Mrs. 
Darling." 

"I knew them," John said, to annoy the others. 

"I think I knew them," said Michael rather 
doubtfully. 

"They were married, you know," explained 
Wendy, "and what do you think they had?" 

"White rats!" cried Nibs, inspired. 

"No." 

"It's awfully puzzling," said Tootles, who 
knew the story by heart. 

"Quiet, Tootles. They had three descendants." 

"What is descendants?" 

"Well, you are one, Twin." 

"Do you hear that, John? I am a descen- 
dant." 

"Descendants are only children," said John. 

"Oh dear, oh dear," sighed Wendy. "Now 
these three children had a faithful nurse called 
Nana; but Mr. Darling was angry with her and 
chained her up in the yard, and so all the children 
flew away." 

"It's an awfully good story," said Nibs. 

"They flew away," Wendy continued, "to the 
Neverland, where the lost children are." 

"I just thought they did," Curly broke in excit- 
edly. "I don't know how it is, but I just thought 
they did!" 

135 



PETER AND WENDY 

"O Wendy," cried Tootles, "was one of the lost 
children called Tootles?" 

"Yes, he was." 

"I am in a story. Hurrah, I am in a story, 
Nibs." 

"Hush. Now I want you to consider the feel- 
ings of the unhappy parents with all their children 
flown away." 

"Oo!" they all moaned, though they were not 
really considering the feelings of the unhappy par- 
ents one jot. 

"Think of the empty beds !" 

"Oo!" 

"It's awfully sad," the first twin said cheer- 
fully. 

"I don't see how it can have a happy ending," 
said the second twin. "Do you, Nibs?" 

"I'm frightfully anxious." 

"If you knew how great is a mother's love," 
Wendy told them triumphantly, "you would have 
no fear." She had now come to the part that 
Peter hated. 

"I do like a mother's love," said Tootles, hit- 
ting Nibs with a pillow. "Do you like a mother's 
love, Nibs?" 

"I do just," said Nibs, hitting back. 

"You see," Wendy said complacently, "our 
heroine knew that the mother would always leave 
the window open for her children to fly back by; 

13 6 



WENDY'S STORY 

so they stayed away for years and had a lovely 
time." 

"Did they ever go back?" 

"Let us now," said Wendy, bracing herself up 
for her finest effort, "take a peep into the future"; 
and they all gave themselves the twist that makes 
peeps into the future easier. "Years have rolled 
by, and who is this elegant lady of uncertain age 
alighting at London Station?" 

"O Wendy, who is she?" cried Nibs, every bit 
as excited as if he didn't know. 

"Can it be — yes — no — it is — the fair Wendy!" 

"Oh!" 

"And who are the two noble portly figures ac- 
companying her, now grown to man's estate? Can 
they be John and Michael? They are !" 

"Oh!" 

" 'See, dear brothers,' says Wendy, pointing 
upwards, " 'there is the window still standing 
open. Ah, now we are rewarded for our sublime 
faith in a mother's love.' So up they flew to their 
mummy and daddy, and pen cannot describe the 
happy scene, over which we draw a veil." 

That was the story, and they were as pleased 
with it as the fair narrator herself. Everything 
just as it should be, you see. Off we skip like the 
most heartless things in the world, which is what 
children are, but so attractive; and we have an 
entirely selfish time, and then when we have need 

137 



PETER AND WENDY 

of special attention we nobly return for- it, confi- 
dent that we shall be rewarded instead of smacked. 

So great indeed was their faith in a mother's 
love that they felt they could afford to be callous 
for a bit longer. 

But there was one there who knew better, and 
when Wendy finished he uttered a hollow groan. 

"What is it, Peter?" she cried, running to him, 
thinking he was ill. She felt him solicitously, 
lower down than his chest. "Where is it, Peter?" 

"It isn't that kind of pain," Peter replied 
darkly. 

"Then what kind is it?" 

"Wendy, you are wrong about mothers." 

They all gathered round him in affright, so 
alarming was his agitation; and with a fine can- 
dour he told them what he had hitherto concealed. 

"Long ago," he said, "I thought like you that 
my mother would always keep the window open 
for me, so I stayed away for moons and moons and 
moons, and then flew back; but the window was 
barred, for mother had forgotten all about me, and 
there was another little boy sleeping in my bed." 

I am not sure that this was true, but Peter 
thought it was true; and it scared them. 

"Are you sure mothers are like that?" 

"Yes." 

So this was the truth about mothers. The toads ! 

Still it is best to be careful; and no one knows 

138 



WENDY'S STORY 

so quickly as a child when he should give in. 
"Wendy, let us go home," cried John and Michael 
together. 

"Yes," she said, clutching them. 

"Not to-night?" asked the lost boys bewildered. 
They knew in what they called their hearts that 
one can get on quite well without a mother, and 
that it is only the mothers who think you can't. 

"At once," Wendy replied resolutely, for the 
horrible thought had come to her: "Perhaps 
mother is in half mourning by this time." 

This dread made her forgetful of what must be 
Peter's feelings, and she said to him rather sharply, 
"Peter, will you make the necessary arrange- 
ments?" 

"If you wish it," he replied, as coolly as if she 
had asked him to pass the nuts. 

Not so much as a sorry-to-lose-you between 
them! If she did not mind the parting, he was 
going to show her, was Peter, that neither did he. 

But of course he cared very much; and he was 
so full of wrath against grown-ups, who, as usual, 
were spoiling everything, that as soon as he got 
inside his tree he breathed intentionally quick 
short breaths at the rate of about five to a second. 
He did this because there is a saying in the Never- 
land that, every time you breathe, a grown-up 
dies; and Peter was killing them off vindictively 
as fast as possible. 

139 



PETER AND WENDY 

Then having given the necessary instructions to 
the redskins he returned to the home, where an 
unworthy scene had been enacted in his absence. 
Panic-stricken at the thought of losing Wendy 
the lost boys had advanced upon her threaten- 
ingly. 

"It will be worse than before she came," they 
cried. 

"We shan't let her go." 

"Let's keep her prisoner." 

"Ay, chain her up." 

In her extremity an instinct told her to which of 
them to turn. 

"Tootles," she cried, "I appeal to you." 

Was it not strange? she appealed to Tootles, 
quite the silliest one. 

Grandly, however, did Tootles respond. For 
that one moment he dropped his silliness and 
spoke with dignity. 

"I am just Tootles," he said, "and nobody 
minds me. But the first who does not behave to 
Wendy like an English gentleman I will blood 
him severely." 

He drew his hanger; and for that instant his 
sun was at noon. The others held back uneasily. 
Then Peter returned, and they saw at once that 
they would get no support from him. He would 
keep no girl in the Neverland against her will. 

"Wendy," he said, striding up and down, "I 
140 



WENDY'S STORY 

have asked the redskins to guide you through the 
wood, as flying tires you so." 

"Thank you, Peter." 

"Then," he continued, in the short sharp voice 
of one accustomed to be obeyed, "Tinker Bell 
will take you across the sea. Wake her, Nibs." 

Nibs had to knock twice before he got an an- 
swer, though Tink had really been sitting up in 
bed listening for some time. 

"Who are you? How dare you? Go away," 
she cried. 

"You are to get up, Tink," Nibs called, "and 
take Wendy on a journey." 

Of course Tink had been delighted to hear that 
Wendy was going; but she was jolly well deter- 
mined not to be her courier, and she said so in still 
more offensive language. Then she pretended to 
be asleep again. 

"She says she won't!" Nibs exclaimed, aghast 
at such insubordination, whereupon Peter went 
sternly toward the young lady's chamber. 

"Tink," he rapped out, "if you don't get up 
and dress at once I will open the curtains, and 
then we shall all see you in your negligee'' 

This made her leap to the floor. "Who said I 
Wasn't getting up?" she cried. 

In the meantime the boys were gazing very for- 
lornly at Wendy, now equipped with John and 
Michael for the journey. By this time they were 

141 



PETER AND WENDY 

dejected, not merely because they were about to 
lose her, but also because they felt that she was 
going off to something nice to which they had not 
been invited. Novelty was beckoning to them as 
usual. 

Crediting them with a nobler feeling, Wendy 
melted. 

"Dear ones," she said, "if you will all come 
with me I feel almost sure I can get my father 
and mother to adopt you." 

The invitation was meant specially for Peter, 
but each of the boys was thinking exclusively of 
himself, and at once they jumped with joy. 

"But won't they think us rather a handful?" 
Nibs asked in the middle of his jump. 

"Oh no," said Wendy, rapidly thinking it out, 
"it will only mean having a few beds in the draw- 
ing-room; they can be hidden behind screens on 
first Thursdays." 

"Peter, can we go?" they all cried imploringly. 
They took it for .granted that if they went he 
would go also, but really they scarcely cared. 
Thus children are ever ready, when novelty 
knocks, to desert their dearest ones. 

"All right," Peter replied with a bitter smile, 
and immediately they rushed to get their things. 

"And now, Peter," Wendy said, thinking she 
had put everything right, "I am going to give you 
your medicine before you go." She loved to give 

142 



WENDY'S STORY 

them medicine, and undoubtedly gave them too 
much. Of course it was only water, but it was out 
of a bottle, .and she always shook the bottle and 
counted the drops, which gave it a certain medici- 
nal quality. On this occasion, however, she did 
not give Peter his draught, for just as she had 
prepared it, she saw a look on his face that made 
her heart sink. 

"Get your things, Peter," she cried, shaking. 

"No," he answered, pretending indifference, 
"I am not going with you, Wendy." 

"Yes, Peter." 

"No." 

To show that her departure would leave him 
unmoved, he skipped up and down the room, 
playing gaily on his heartless pipes. She had to 
run about after him, though it was rather undig- 
nified. 

"To find your mother," she coaxed. 

Now, if Peter had ever quite had a mother, he 
no longer missed her. He could do very well 
without one. He had thought them out, and re- 
membered only their bad points. 

"No, no," he told Wendy decisively; "perhaps 
she would say I was old, and I just want always 
to be a little boy and to have fun." 

"But, Peter " 

"No." 

And so the others had to be told, 

H3 



PETER AND WENDY 

"Peter isn't coming." 

Peter not coming ! They gazed blankly at him, 
their sticks over their backs, and on each stick a 
bundle. Their first thought was that if Peter was 
not going he had probably changed his mind about 
letting them go. 

But he was far too proud for that. "If you find 
your mothers," he said darkly, "I hope you will 
like them." 

The awful cynicism of this made an uncom- 
fortable impression, and most of them began to 
look rather doubtful. After all, their faces said, 
were they not noodles to want to go? 

"Now then," cried Peter, "no fuss, no blubber- 
ing; good-bye, Wendy"; and he held out his hand 
cheerily, quite as if they must really go now, for 
he had something important to do. 

She had to take his hand, as there was no indica- 
tion that he would prefer a thimble. 

"You will remember about changing your flan- 
nels, Peter?" she said, lingering over him. She 
was always so particular about their flannels. 

"Yes." 

"And you will take your medicine?" 

"Yes," 

That seemed to be everything, and an awkward 
pause followed. Peter, however, was not the kind 
that breaks down before people. "Are you ready. 
Tinker Bell?" he called out. 

144 



WENDY'S STORY 

"Ay! ay!" 

"Then lead the way." 

Tink darted up the nearest tree; but no one 
followed her, for it was at this moment that the 
pirates made their dreadful attack upon the red- 
skins. Above, where all had been so still, the air 
was rent with shrieks and the clash of steel. Be- 
low, there was dead silence. Mouths opened and 
remained open. Wendy fell on her knees, but her 
arms were extended toward Peter. All arms were 
extended to him, as if suddenly blown in his direc- 
tion; they were beseeching him mutely not to 
desert them. As for Peter, he seized his sword, the 
same he thought he had slain Barbecue with, and 
the lust of battle was in his eye. 



HS 



CHAPTER XII 

THE CHILDREN ARE CARRIED OFF 

The pirate attack had been a complete surprise: 
a sure proof that the unscrupulous Hook had con- 
ducted it improperly, for to surprise redskins 
fairly is beyond the wit of the white man. 

By all the unwritten laws of savage warfare it 
is always the redskin who attacks, and with the 
wiliness of his race he does it just before the dawn, 
at which time he knows the courage of the whites 
to be at its lowest ebb. The white men have in 
the meantime made a rude stockade on the sum- 
mit of yonder undulating ground, at the foot of 
which a stream runs, for it is destruction to be too 
far from water. There they await the onslaught, 
the inexperienced ones clutching their revolvers 
and treading on twigs, but the old hands sleeping 
tranquilly until just before the dawn. Through 
the long black night the savage scouts wriggle, 
snake-like, among the grass without stirring a 
blade. The brushwood closes behind them as 
silently as sand into which a mole has dived. Not 

146 



THE CHILDREN ARE CARRIED OFF 

a sound is to be heard, save when they give vent 
to a wonderful imitation of the lonely call of the 
coyote. The cry is answered by other braves ; and 
some of them do it even better than the coyotes, 
who are not very good at it. So the chill hours 
wear on, and the long suspense is horribly trying 
to the paleface who has to live through it for the 
first time; but to the trained hand those ghastly 
calls and still ghastlier silences are but an intima- 
tion of how the night is marching. 

That this was the usual procedure was so well- 
known to Hook that in disregarding it he cannot 
be excused on the plea of ignorance. 

The Piccaninnies, on their part, trusted implic- 
itly to his honour, and their whole action of the 
night stands out in marked contrast to his. They 
left nothing undone that was consistent with the 
reputation of their tribe. With that alertness of 
the senses which is at once the marvel and despair 
of civilised peoples, they knew that the pirates 
were on the island from the moment one of them 
trod on a dry stick; and in an incredibly short 
space of time the coyote cries began. Every foot 
of ground between the spot where Hook had 
landed his forces and the home under the trees 
was stealthily examined by braves wearing their 
moccasins with the heels in front. They found 
only one hillock with a stream at its base, so that 
Hook had no choice; here he must establish him- 

147 



PETER AND WENDY 

seli and wait for just before the dawn. Every- 
thing being thus mapped out with almost diaboli- 
cal cunning, the main body of the redskins folded 
their blankets around them, and in the phlegmatic 
manner that is to them the pearl of manhood 
squatted above the children's home, awaiting the 
cold moment when they should deal pale death. 

Here dreaming, though wide-awake, of the ex- 
quisite tortures to which they were to put him at 
break of day, those confiding savages were found 
by the treacherous Hook. From the accounts 
afterwards supplied by such of the scouts as 
escaped the carnage, he does not seem even to 
have paused at the rising ground, though it is 
certain that in the grey light he must have seen 
it: no thought of waiting to be attacked appears 
from first to last to have visited his subtle mind; 
he would not even hold off till the night was 
nearly spent; on he pounded with no policy but 
to fall to. What could the bewildered scouts do, 
masters as they were of every war-like artifice save 
this one, but trot helplessly after him, exposing 
themselves fatally to view, the while they gave 
pathetic utterance to the coyote cry. 

Around the brave Tiger Lily were a dozen of 
her stoutest warriors, and they suddenly saw the 
perfidious pirates bearing down upon them. Fell 
from their eyes then the film through which they 
had looked at victory. No more would they torture 

148 



THE CHILDREN ARE CARRIED OFF 

at the stake. For them the happy hunting-grounds 
now. They knew it; but as their fathers' sons 
they acquitted themselves. Even then they had 
time to gather in a phalanx that would have been 
hard to break had they risen quickly, but this they 
were forbidden to do by the traditions of their 
race. It is written that the noble savage must 
never express surprise in the presence of the 
white. Thus terrible as the sudden appearance of 
the pirates must have been to them, they remained 
stationary for a moment, not a muscle moving; as 
if the foe had come by invitation. Then, indeed, 
the tradition gallantly upheld, they seized their 
weapons, and the air was torn with the war-cry; 
but it was now too late. 

It is no part of ours to describe what was a 
massacre rather than a fight. Thus perished many 
of the flower of the Piccaninny tribe. Not all 
unavenged did they die, for with Lean Wolf fell 
Alf Mason, to disturb the Spanish Main no more, 
and among others who bit the dust were Geo. 
Scourie, Chas. Turley, and the Alsatian Foggerty. 
Turley fell to the tomahawk of the terrible Pan- 
ther, who ultimately cut a way through the pirates 
with Tiger Lily and a small remnant of the tribe. 

To what extent Hook is to blame for his tactics 
on this occasion is for the historian to decide. 
Had he waited on the rising ground till the proper 
hour he and his men would probably have been 

149 



PETER AND WENDY 

butchered; and in judging him it is only fair to 
take this into account. What he should perhaps 
have done was to acquaint his opponents that he 
proposed to follow a new method. On the other 
hand, this, as destroying the element of surprise, 
would have made his strategy of no avail, so that 
the whole question is beset with difficulties. One 
cannot at least withhold a reluctant admiration 
for the wit that had conceived so bold a scheme, 
and the fell genius with which it was carried out. 

What were his own feelings about himself at 
that triumphant moment? Fain would his dogs 
have known, as breathing heavily and wiping 
their cutlasses, they gathered at a discreet distance 
from his hook, and squinted through their ferret 
eyes at this extraordinary man. Elation must 
have been in his heart, but his face did not reflect 
it: ever a dark and solitary enigma, he stood aloof 
from his followers in spirit as in substance. 

The night's work was not yet over, for it was 
not the redskins he had come out to destroy; they 
were but the bees to be smoked, so that he should 
get at the honey. It was Pan he wanted, Pan and 
Wendy and their band, but chiefly Pan. 

Peter was such a small boy that one tends to 
wonder at the man's hatred of him. True he had 
flung Hook's arm to the crocodile, but even this 
and the increased insecurity of life to which it led, 
owing to the crocodile's pertinacity, hardly ac- 

150 



THE CHILDREN ARE CARRIED OFF 

count for a vindictiveness so relentless and malig- 
nant. The truth is that there was a something 
about Peter which goaded the pirate captain to 
frenzy. It was not his courage, it was not his 
engaging appearance, it was not — . There is no 
beating about the bush, for we know quite well 
what it was, and have got to tell. It was Peter's 
cockiness. 

This had got on Hook's nerves; it made his iron 
claw twitch, and at night it disturbed him like an 
insect. While Peter lived, the tortured man felt 
that he was a lion in a cage into which a sparrow 
had come. 

The question now was how to get down the 
trees, or how to get his dogs down? He ran his 
greedy eyes over them, searching for the thinnest 
ones. They wriggled uncomfortably, for they 
knew he would not scruple to ram them down with 
poles. 

In the meantime, what of the boys? We have 
seen them at the first clang of weapons, turned as 
it were into stone figures, open-mouthed, all ap- 
pealing with outstretched arms to Peter; and we 
return (to them as their mouths close, and their arms 
fall to their sides. The pandemonium above has 
ceased almost as suddenly as it arose, passed like a 
fierce gust of wind; but they know that in the 
passing it has determined their fate. 

Which side had won? 

151 



PETER AND WENDY 

The pirates, listening avidly at the mouths of 
the trees, heard the question put by every boy, and 
alas, they also heard Peter's answer. 

"If the redskins have won," he said, "they will 
beat the tom-tom; it is always their sign of vic- 
tory." 

Now Smee had found the tom-tom, and was at 
that moment sitting on it. "You will never hear 
the tom-tom again," he muttered, but inaudibly of 
course, for strict silence had been enjoined. To 
his amazement Hook signed to him to beat the 
tom-tom, and slowly there came to Smee an under- 
standing of the dreadful wickedness of the order. 
Never, probably, had this simple man admired 
Hook so much. 

Twice Smee beat upon the instrument, and then 
stopped to listen gleefully. 

"The tom-tom," the miscreants heard Peter cry; 
"an Indian victory!" 

The doomed children answered with a cheer that 
was music to the black hearts above, and almost 
immediately they repeated their good-byes to 
Peter. This puzzled the pirates, but all their other 
feelings were swallowed by a base delight that the 
enemy were about to come up the trees. They 
smirked at each other and rubbed their hands. Rap- 
idly and silently Hook gave his orders : one man to 
each tree, and the others to arrange themselves in 
a line two yards apart. 

152 



CHAPTER XIII 

DO YOU BELIEVE IN FAIRIES ? 

The more quickly this horror is disposed of the 
better. The first to emerge from his tree was 
Curly. He rose out of it into the arms of Cecco, 
who flung him to Smee, who flung him to Starkey, 
who flung him to Bill Jukes, who flung him to 
Noodler, and so he was tossed from one to another 
till he fell at the feet of the black pirate. All the 
boys were plucked from their trees in this ruthless 
manner; and several of them were in the air at a 
time, like bales of goods flung from hand to hand. 

A different treatment was accorded to Wendy ^ 
who came last. With ironical politeness Hook 
raised his hat to her, and, offering her his arm, 
escorted her to the spot where the others were being 
gagged. He did it with such an air, he was so 
frightfully distingue, that she was too fascinated 
to cry out. She was only a little girl. 

Perhaps it is tell-tale to divulge that for a 
moment Hook entranced her, and we tell on her 
only because her slip led to strange results. Had 

153 



PETER AND WENDY 

she haughtily unhanded him (and we should have 
loved to write it of her), she would have been 
hurled through the air like the others, and then 
Hook would probably not have been present at 
the tying of the children; and had he not been 
at the tying he would not have discovered 
Slightly's secret, and without the secret he could 
not presently have made his foul attempt on 
Peter's life. 

They were tied to prevent their flying away, 
doubled up with their knees close to their ears; 
and for this job the black pirate had cut a rope into 
nine equal pieces. All went well with the trussing 
until Slightly's turn came, when he was found to 
be like those irritating parcels that use up all the 
string in going round and leave no tags with which 
to tie a knot. The pirates kicked him in their rage, 
just as you kick the parcel (though in fairness you 
should kick the string) ; and strange to say it was 
Hook who told them to belay their violence. His 
lip was curled with malicious triumph. While his 
dogs were merely sweating because every time they 
tried to pack the unhappy lad tight in one part he 
bulged out in another, Hook's master mind had 
gone far beneath Slightly's surface, probing not 
for effects but for causes ; and his exultation showed 
that he had found them. Slightly, white to the 
gills, knew that Hook had surprised his secret, 
which was this, that no boy so blown out could use 

154 



DO YOU BELIEVE IN FAIRIES? 

a tree wherein an average man need stick. Poor 
Slightly, most wretched of all the children now, 
for he was in a panic about Peter, bitterly re- 
gretted what he had done. Madly addicted to the 
drinking of water when he was hot, he had swelled 
in consequence to his present girth, and instead of 
reducing himself to fit his tree he had, unknown to 
the others, whittled his tree to make it fit him. 

Sufficient of this Hook guessed to persuade him 
that Peter at last lay at his mercy, but no word of 
the dark design that now formed in the subter- 
ranean caverns of his mind crossed his lips; he 
merely signed that the captives were to be con- 
veyed to the ship, and that he would be alone. 

How to convey them? Hunched up in their 
ropes they might indeed be rolled down hill like 
barrels, but most of the way lay through a morass. 
Again Hook's genius surmounted difficulties. He 
indicated that the little house must be used as a 
conveyance. The children were flung into it, four 
stout pirates raised it on their shoulders, the others 
fell in behind, and singing the hateful pirate 
chorus the strange procession set off through the 
wood. I don't know whether any of the children 
were crying; if so, the singing drowned the sound; 
but as the little house disappeared in the forest, a 
brave though tiny jet of smoke issued from its 
chimney as if defying Hook. 

Hook saw it, and it did Peter a bad service. It 

155 



PETER AND WENDY 

dried up any trickle of pity for him that may have 
remained in the pirate's infuriated breast. 

The first thing he did on finding himself alone 
in the fast falling night was to tiptoe to Slightly's 
tree, and make sure that it provided him with a 
passage. Then for long he remained brooding; 
his hat of ill omen on the sward, so that a gentle 
breeze which had arisen might play refreshingly 
through his hair. Dark as were his thoughts his 
blue eyes were as soft as the periwinkle. Intently 
he listened for any sound from the nether world, 
but all was as silent below as above; the house 
under the ground seemed to be but one more empty 
tenement in the void. Was that boy asleep, or did 
he stand waiting at the foot of Slightly's tree, with 
his dagger in his hand ? 

There was no way of knowing, save by going 
down. Hook let his cloak slip softly to the 
ground, and then biting his lips till a lewd blood 
stood on them, he stepped into the tree. He was 
a brave man, but for a moment he had to stop 
there and wipe his brow, which was dripping like 
a candle. Then silently he let himself gQ into the 
unknown. 

He arrived unmolested at the foot of the shaft, 
and stood still again, biting at his breath, which 
had almost left him. As his eyes became accus- 
tomed to the dim light various objects in the home 
under the trees took shape; but the only one on 

i 5 6 



DO YOU BELIEVE IN FAIRIES? 

which his greedy gaze rested, long sought for and 
found at last, was the great bed. On the bed lay- 
Peter fast asleep. 

Unaware of the tragedy being enacted above, 
Peter had continued, for a little time after the chil- 
dren left, to play gaily on his pipes: no doubt 
rather a forlorn attempt to prove to himself that 
he did not care. Then he decided not to take his 
medicine, so as to grieve Wendy. Then he lay 
down on the bed outside the coverlet, to vex her 
still more; for she had always tucked them inside 
it, because you never kno\# that you may not grow 
chilly at the turn of the night. Then he nearly 
cried; but it struck him how indignant she would 
be if he laughed instead; so he laughed a haughty 
laugh and fell asleep in the middle of it. 

Sometimes, though not often, he had dreams, 
and they were more painful than the dreams of 
other boys. For hours he could not be separated 
from these dreams, though he wailed piteously in 
them. They had to do, I think, with the riddle of 
his existence. At such times it had been Wendy's 
custom to take him out of bed and sit with him on 
her lap, soothing him in dear ways of her own in- 
vention, and when he grew calmer to put him back 
to bed before he quite woke up, so that he should 
not know of the indignity to which she had sub- 
jected him. But on this occasion he had fallen at 
once into a dreamless sleep. One arm dropped 

157 



PETER AND WENDY 

over the edge of the bed, one leg was arched, and 
the unfinished part of his laugh was stranded on 
his mouth, which was open, showing the little 
pearls. 

Thus defenceless Hook found him. He stood 
silent at the foot of the tree looking across the 
chamber at his enemy. Did no feeling of compas- 
sion stir his sombre breast? The man was not 
wholly evil; he loved flowers (I have been told) 
and sweet music (he was himself no mean per- 
former on the harpsichord) ; and, let it be frankly 
admitted, the idyllic nature of the scene shook him 
profoundly. Mastered by his better self he would 
have returned reluctantly up the tree, but for one 
thing. 

What stayed him was Peter's impertinent ap- 
pearance as he slept. The open mouth, the droop- 
ing arm, the arched knee: they were such a per- 
sonification of cockiness as, taken together, will 
never again one may hope be .presented to eyes so 
sensitive to their offensiveness. They steeled 
Hook's heart. If his rage had broken him into a 
hundred pieces every one of them would have dis- 
regarded the incident, and leapt at the sleeper. 

Though a light from the one lamp shone 
dimly on the bed Hook stood in darkness himself, 
and at the first stealthy step forward he discov- 
ered an obstacle, the door of Slightly' s tree. It 
did not entirely fill the aperture, and he had been 

i 5 8 



DO YOU BELIEVE IN FAIRIES? 

looking over it. Feeling for the catch, he found 
to his fury that it was low down, beyond his reach. 
To his disordered brain it seemed then that the 
irritating quality in Peter's face and figure visibly 
increased, and he rattled the door and flung him- 
self against it. Was his enemy to escape him 
after all? 

But what was that? The red in his eye had 
caught sight of Peter's medicine standing on a 
ledge within easy reach. He fathomed what it 
was straightway, and immediately he knew that 
the sleeper was in his power. 

Lest he should be taken alive, Hook always car- 
ried about his person a dreadful drug, blended by 
himself of all the death-dealing rings that had 
come into his possession. These he had boiled 
down into a yellow liquid quite unknown to sci- 
ence, which was probably the most virulent poison 
in existence. 

Five drops of this he now added to Peter's cup. 
His hand shook, but it was in exultation rather 
than in shame. As he did it he avoided glancing 
at the sleeper, but not lest pity should unnerve 
him; merely to avoid spilling. Then one long 
gloating look he cast upon his victim, and turning, 
wormed his way with difficulty up the tree. As he 
emerged at the top he looked the very spirit of evil 
breaking from its hole. Donning his hat at its 
most rakish angle, he wound his cloak around him, 

159 



PETER AND WENDY 

holding one end in front as if to conceal his person 
from the night, of which it was the blackest part, 
and muttering strangely to himself stole away 
through the trees. 

Peter slept on. The light guttered and went 
out, leaving the tenement in darkness ; but still he 
slept. It must have been not less than ten o'clock 
by the crocodile, when he suddenly sat up in his 
bed, wakened by he knew not what. It was a soft 
cautious tapping on the door of his tree. 

Soft and cautious, but in that stillness it was 
sinister. Peter felt for his dagger till his hand 
gripped it. Then he spoke. 

"Who is that?" 

For long there was no answer: then again the 
knock. 

"Who are you?" 

No answer. 

He was thrilled, and he loved being thrilled. In 
two strides he reached his door. Unlike Slightly's 
door it filled the aperture, so that he could not see 
beyond it, nor could the one knocking see him. 

"I won't open unless you speak," Peter cried. 

Then at last the visitor spoke, in a lovely bell- 
like voice. 

"Let me in, Peter." 

It was Tink, and quickly he unbarred to her. 
She flew in excitedly, her face flushed and her dress 
stained with mud. 

160 



DO YOU BELIEVE IN FAIRIES? 

"What is it? 5 

"Oh, you could never guess!" she cried, and 
offered him three guesses. "Out with it!" he 
shouted, and in one ungrammatical sentence, as 
long as the ribbons conjurers pull from their 
mouths, she told of the capture of Wendy and the 
boys. 

Peter's heart bobbed up and down as he listened. 
Wendy bound, and on the pirate ship; she who 
loved everything to be just so! 

C T11 rescue her!" he cried, leaping at his 
weapons. As he leapt he thought of something he 
could do to please her. He could take his medicine. 

His hand closed on the fatal draught. 

"No!" shrieked Tinker Bell, who had heard 
Hook muttering about his deed as he sped through 
the forest. 

"Why not?" 

"It is poisoned." 

"Poisoned! Who could have poisoned it?" 

"Hook." 

"Don't be silly. How could Hook have got 
down here?" 

Alas, Tinker Bell could not explain this, for 
even she did not know the dark secret of Slightly's 
tree. Nevertheless Hook's words had left no 
room for doubt. The cup was poisoned. 

"Besides," said Peter, quite believing himself, 
"I never fell asleep." 

161 



PETER AND WENDY 

He raised the cup. No time for words now; 
time for deeds, and with one of her lightning 
movements Tink got between his lips and the 
draught, and drained it to the dregs. 

"Why, Tink, how dare you drink my medicine ?" 

But she did not answer. Already she was reel- 
ing in the air. 

"What is the matter with you?" cried Peter, 
suddenly afraid. 

"It was poisoned, Peter," she told him softly; 
"and now I am going to be dead." 

"O Tink, did you drink it to save me?" 

"Yes." 

"But why, Tink?" 

Her wings would scarcely carry her now, but in 
reply she alighted on his shoulder and gave his 
nose a loving bite. She whispered in his ear "you 
silly ass," and then, tottering to her chamber, lay 
down on the bed. 

His head almost filled the fourth wall of her 
little room as he knelt near her in distress. Every 
moment her light was growing fainter; and he 
knew that if it went out she would be no more. 
She liked his tears so much that she put out her 
beautiful finger and let them run over it. 

Her voice was so low that at first he could not 
make out what she said. Then he made it out. 
She was saying that she thought she could get well 
again if children believed in fairies. 

162 



DO YOU BELIEVE IN FAIRIES? 

Peter flung out his arms. There were no chil- 
dren there, and it was night time; but he ad- 
dressed all who might be dreaming of the Never- 
land, and who were therefore nearer to him than 
you think: boys and girls in their nighties, and 
naked papooses in their baskets hung from trees. 

"Do you believe?" he cried. 

Tink sat up in bed almost briskly to listen to 
her fate. 

She fancied she heard answers in the affirma- 
tive, and then again she wasn't sure. 

"What do you think?" she asked Peter. 

"If you believe," he shouted to them, "clap 
your hands; don't let Tink die." 

Many clapped. 

Some didn't. 

A few little beasts hissed. 

The clapping stopped suddenly; as if countless 
mothers had rushed to their nurseries to see what 
on earth was happening; but already Tink was 
saved. First her voice grew strong, then she 
popped out of bed, then she was flashing through 
the room more merry and impudent than ever. 
She never thought of thanking those who believed, 
but she would have liked to get at the ones who 
had hissed. 

"And now to rescue Wendy!" 

The moon was riding in a cloudy heaven when 
Peter rose from his tree, begirt with weapons and 

163 



PETER AND WENDY 

wearing little else, to set out upon his perilous 
quest. It was not such a night as he would have 
chosen. He had hoped to fly, keeping not far from 
the ground so that nothing unwonted should 
escape his eyes; but in that fitful light to have 
flown low would have meant trailing his shadow 
through the trees, thus disturbing the birds and 
acquainting a watchful foe that he was astir. 

He regretted now that he had given the birds 
of the island such strange names that they are very 
wild and difficult of approach. 

There was no other course but to press forward 
in redskin fashion, at which happily he was an 
adept. But in what direction, for he could not be 
sure that the children had been taken to the ship? 
A slight fall of snow had obliterated all foot- 
marks; and a deathly silence pervaded the island, 
as if for a space Nature stood still in horror of the 
recent carnage. He had taught the children some- 
thing of the forest lore that he had himself learned 
from Tiger Lily and Tinker Bell, and knew that 
in their dire hour they were not likely to forget it. 
Slightly, if he had an opportunity, would blaze 
the trees, for instance, Curly would drop seeds, 
and Wendy would leave her handkerchief at some 
important place. But morning was needed to 
search for such guidance, and he could not wait. 
The upper world had called him, but would give 
no help. 

164 



DO YOU BELIEVE IN FAIRIES? 

The crocodile passed him, but not another living 
thing, not a sound, not a movement; and yet he 
knew well that sudden death might be at the next 
tree, or stalking him from behind. 

He swore this terrible oath: "Hook or me this 
time." 

Now he crawled forward like a snake; and 
again, erect, he darted across a space on which the 
moonlight played, one finger on his lip and his 
dagger at the ready. He was frightfully happy. 



165 



CHAPTER XIV 

THE PIRATE SHIP 

One green light squinting over Kidd's Creek, 
which is near the mouth of the pirate river, marked 
where the brig, the Jolly Roger, lay, low in the 
water; a rakish-looking craft foul to the hull, 
every beam in her detestable like ground strewn 
with mangled feathers. She was the cannibal of 
the seas, and scarce needed that watchful eye, for 
she floated immune in the horror of her name. 

She was wrapped in the blanket of night, 
through which no sound from her could have 
reached the shore. There was little sound, and 
none agreeable save the whir of the ship's sewing 
machine at which Smee sat, ever industrious and 
obliging, the essence of the commonplace, pathetic 
Smee. I know not why he was so infinitely pa- 
thetic, unless it were because he was so pathetically 
unaware of it; but even strong men had to turn 
hastily from looking at him, and more than once 
on summer evenings he had touched the fount of 
Hook's tears and made it flow. Of this, as of al- 
most everything else, Smee was quite unconscious. 

166 



THE PIRATE SHIP 

A few of the pirates leant over the bulwarks 
drinking in the miasma of the night; others 
sprawled by barrels over games of dice and cards; 
and the exhausted four who had carried the little 
house lay prone on the deck, where even in their 
sleep they rolled skilfully to this side or that out 
of Hook's reach, lest he should claw them me- 
chanically in passing. 

Hook trod the deck in thought. O man un- 
fathomable. It was his hour of triumph. Peter 
had been removed for ever from his path, and all 
the other boys were on the brig, about to walk the 
plank. It was his grimmest deed since the days 
when he had brought Barbecue to heel; and know- 
ing as we do how vain a tabernacle is man, could 
we be surprised had he now paced the deck un- 
steadily, bellied out by the winds of his success? 

But there was no elation in his gait, which kept 
pace with the action of his sombre mind. Hook 
was profoundly dejected. 

He was often thus when communing with him- 
self on board ship in the quietude of the night. It 
was because he was so terribly alone. This in- 
scrutable man never felt more alone than when 
surrounded by his dogs. They were socially so in- 
ferior to him. 

Hook was not his true name. To reveal who he 
really was would even at this date set the country 
in a blaze ; but as those who read between the lines 

167 



PETER AND WENDY 

must already have guessed, he had been at a famous 
public school; and its traditions still clung to him 
like garments, with which indeed they are largely 
concerned. Thus it was offensive to him even now 
to board a ship in the same dress in which he 
grappled her, and he still adhered in his walk to 
the school's distinguished slouch. But above all 
he retained the passion for good form. 

Good form! However much he may have de- 
generated, he still knew that this is all that really 
matters. 

From far within him he heard a creaking as of 
rusty portals, and through them came a stern tap- 
tap-tap, like hammering in the night when one 
cannot sleep. "Have you been good form to- 
day?" was their eternal question. 

"Fame, fame, that glittering bauble, it is 
mine !" he cried. 

"Is it quite good form to be distinguished at 
anything?" the tap-tap from his school replied. 

"I am the only man whom Barbecue feared," 
he urged, "and Flint himself feared Barbecue." 

"Barbecue, Flint — what house?" came the cut- 
ting retort. 

Most disquieting reflection of all, was it not bad 
form to think about good form? 

His vitals were tortured by this problem. It 
was a claw within him sharper than the iron one; 
and as it tore him, the perspiration dripped down 

168 



THE PIRATE SHIP 

his tallow countenance and streaked his doublet. 
Ofttimes he drew his sleeve across his face, but 
there was no damming that trickle. 

Ah, envy not Hook. 

There came to him a presentiment of his early 
dissolution. It was as if Peter's terrible oath had 
boarded the ship. Hook felt a gloomy desire to 
make his dying speech, lest presently there should 
be no time for it. 

"Better for Hook," he cried, "if he had had less 
ambition !" It was in his darkest hours only that 
he referred to himself in the third person. 

"No little children love me!" 

Strange that he should think of this, which had 
never troubled him before; perhaps the sewing 
machine brought it to his mind. For long he mut- 
tered to himself, staring at Smee, who was hem- 
ming placidly, under the conviction that all chil- 
dren feared him. 

Feared him ! Feared Smee ! There was not a 
child on board the brig that night who did not al- 
ready love him. He had said horrid things to 
them and hit them with the palm of his hand, be- 
cause he could not hit with his fist, but they had 
only clung to him the more. Michael had tried on 
his spectacles. 

To tell poor Smee that they thought him lov- 
able! Hook itched to do it, but it seemed too 
brutal. Instead, he revolved this mystery in his 

169 



PETER AND WENDY 

mind: why do they find Smee lovable? He pur- 
sued the problem like the sleuth-hound that he 
was. If Smee was lovable, what was it that made 
him so? A terrible answer suddenly presented it- 
self— "Good form?" 

Had the bo'sun good form without knowing it, 
which is the best form of all ? 

He remembered that you have to prove you 
don't know you have it before you are eligible for 
Pop. 

With a cry of rage he raised his iron hand over 
Smee's head; but he did not tear. What arrested 
him was this reflection : 

"To claw a man because he is good form, what 
would that be?" 

"Bad form!" 

The unhappy Hook was as impotent as he was 
damp, and he fell forward like a cut flower. 

His dogs thinking him out of the way for a 
time, discipline instantly relaxed; and they broke 
into a bacchanalian dance, which brought him 
to his feet at once, all traces of human weakness 
gone, as if a bucket of water had passed over 
him. 

"Quiet, you scugs," he cried, "or I'll cast an- 
chor in you"; and at once the din was hushed. 
"Are all the children chained, so that they cannot 
fly away?" 

"Ay, ay." 

170 



THE PIRATE SHIP 

"Then hoist them up." 

The wretched prisoners were dragged from the 
hold, all except Wendy, and ranged in line in 
front of him. For a time he seemed unconscious 
of their presence. He lolled at his ease, humming, 
not unmelodiously, snatches of a rude song, and 
fingering a pack of cards. Ever and anon the light 
from his cigar gave a touch of colour to his face. 

"Now then, bullies/' he said briskly, "six of 
you walk the plank to-night, but I have room for 
two cabin boys. Which of you is it to be?" 

"Don't irritate him unnecessarily," had been 
Wendy's instructions in the hold; so Tootles 
stepped forward politely. Tootles hated the idea 
of signing under such a man, but an instinct told 
him that it would be prudent to lay the respon- 
sibility on an absent person; and though a some- 
what silly boy, he knew that mothers alone are 
always willing to be the buffer. All children know 
this about mothers, and despise them for it, but 
make constant use of it. 

So Tootles explained prudently, "You see, sir, 
I don't think my mother would like me to be a 
pirate. Would your mother like you to be a pi- 
rate, Slightly?" 

He winked at Slightly, who said mournfully, 
"I don't think so," as if he wished things had been 
otherwise. "Would your mother like you to be a 
pirate, Twin?" 

171 



PETER AND WENDY 

"I don't think so," said the first twin, as clever 
as the others. "Nibs, would " 

"Stow this gab," roared Hook, and the spokes- 
men were dragged back. "You, boy," he said, ad- 
dressing John, "you look as if you had a little 
pluck in you. Didst never want to be a pirate, 
my hearty?" 

Now John had sometimes experienced this 
hankering at maths, prep.; and he was struck by 
Hook's picking him out. 

"I once thought of calling myself Red-handed 
Jack," he said diffidently. 

"And a good name too. We'll call you that 
here, bully, if you join." 

"What do you think, Michael?" asked John. 

"What would you call me if I join?" Michael 
demanded. 

"Blackbeard Joe." 

Michael was naturally impressed. "What do 
you think, John?" He wanted John to decide, 
and John wanted him to decide. 

"Shall we still be respectful subjects of the 
King?" John inquired. 

Through Hook's teeth came the answer: "You 
would have to swear, 'Down with the King.' " 

Perhaps John had not behaved very well so far, 
but he shone out now. 

"Then I refuse !" he cried, banging the barrel in 
front of Hook. 

172 



THE PIRATE SHIP 

"And I refuse," cried Michael. 

"Rule Britannia !" squeaked Curly. 

The infuriated pirates buffeted them in the 
mouth; and Hook roared out, "That seals your 
doom. Bring up their mother. Get the plank 
ready." 

They were only boys, and they went white as 
they saw Jukes and Cecco preparing the fatal 
plank. But they tried to look brave when Wendy 
was brought up. 

No words of mine can tell you how Wendy de- 
spised those pirates. To the boys there was at 
least some glamour in the pirate calling; but all 
that she saw was that the ship had not been tidied 
for years. There was not a porthole on the grimy 
glass of which you might not have written with 
your finger "Dirty pig" ; and she had already writ- 
ten it on several. But as the boys gathered round 
her she had no thought, of course, save for them. 

"So, my beauty," said Hook, as if he spoke in 
syrup, "you are to see your children walk the 
plank." 

Fine gentleman though he was, the intensity of 
his communings had soiled his ruff, and suddenly 
he knew that she was gazing at it. With a hasty 
gesture he tried to hide it, but he was too late. 

"Are they to die?" asked Wendy, with a look 
of such frightful contempt that he nearly fainted. 

"They are," he snarled. "Silence all," he called 

173 



PETER AND WENDY 

gloatingly, "for a mother's last words to her chil- 
dren." 

At this moment Wendy was grand. 'These 
are my last words, dear boys," she said firmly. "I 
feel that I have a message to you from your real 
mothers, and it is this : c We hope our sons will die 
like English gentlemen.' " 

Even the pirates were awed, and Tootles cried 
out hysterically, "I am going to do what my 
mother hopes. What are you to do, Nibs?" 

"What my mother hopes. What are you to do, 
Twin?" 

"What my mother hopes. John, what are " 

But Hook had found his voice again. 

"Tie her up !" he shouted. 

It was Smee who tied her to the mast. "See 
here, honey," he whispered, "I'll save you if you 
promise to be my mother." 

But not even for Smee would she make such a 
promise. "I would almost rather have no children 
at all," she said disdainfully. 

It is sad to know that not a boy was looking at 
her as Smee tied her to the mast; the eyes of all 
were on the plank : that last little walk they were 
about to take. They were no longer able to hope 
that they would walk it manfully, for the capacity 
to think had gone from them; they could stare and 
shiver only. 

Hook smiled on them with his teeth closed, and 
174 



THE PIRATE SHIP 

took a step toward Wendy. His intention was to 
turn her face so that she should see the boys walk- 
ing the plank one by one. But he never reached 
her, he never heard the cry of anguish he hoped to 
wring from her. He heard something else instead. 

It was the terrible tick-tick of the crocodile. 

They all heard it — pirates, boys, Wendy — and 
immediately every head was blown in one direc- 
tion; not to the water whence the sound proceeded, 
but toward Hook. All knew that what was about 
to happen concerned him alone, and that from 
being actors they were suddenly become spec- 
tators. 

Very frightful was it to see the change that 
came over him. It was as if he had been clipped 
at every joint. He fell in a little heap. 

The sound came steadily nearer; and in advance 
of it came this ghastly thought, "the crocodile is 
about to board the ship" ! 

Even the iron claw hung inactive; as if know- 
ing that it was no intrinsic part of what the 
attacking force wanted. Left so fearfully alone, 
any other man would have lain with his eyes shut 
where he fell : but the gigantic brain of Hook was 
still working, and under its guidance he crawled 
on his knees along the deck as far from the sound 
as he could go. The pirates respectfully cleared 
a passage for him, and it was only when he brought 
up against the bulwarks that he spoke. 

175 



PETER AND WENDY 

"Hide me!" he cried hoarsely. 

They gathered round him, all eyes averted from 
the thing that was coming aboard. They had no 
thought of fighting it. It was Fate. 

Only when Hook was hidden from them did 
curiosity loosen the limbs of the boys so that they 
could rush to the ship's side to see the crocodile 
climbing it. Then they got the strangest surprise 
of this Night of Nights; for it was no crocodile 
that was coming to their aid. It was Peter. 

He signed to them not to give vent to any cry 
of admiration that might arouse suspicion. Then 
he went on ticking. 



176 



CHAPTER XV 

"hook or me this time" 

Odd tilings happen to all of us on our way through 
life without our noticing for a time that they have 
happened. Thus, to take an instance, we sud- 
denly discover that we have been deaf in one ear 
for we don't know how long, but, say, half an 
hour. Now such an experience had come that 
night to Peter. When last we saw him he was 
stealing across the island with one finger to his 
lips and his dagger at the ready. He had seen the 
crocodile pass by without noticing anything pe- 
culiar about it, but by and by he remembered that 
it had not been ticking. At first he thought this 
eerie, but soon he concluded rightly that the clock 
had run down. 

Without giving a thought to what might be the 
feelings of a fellow-creature thus abruptly de- 
prived of its closest companion, Peter began to 
consider how he could turn the catastrophe to his 
own use ; and he decided to tick, so that wild beasts 
should believe he was the crocodile and let him 
pass unmolested. He ticked superbly, but with 

177 



PETER AND WENDY 

one unforeseen result. The crocodile was among 
those who heard the sound, and it followed him, 
though whether with the purpose of regaining 
what it had lost, or merely as a friend under the 
belief that it was again ticking itself, will never 
be certainly known, for, like all slaves to a fixed 
idea, it was a stupid beast. 

Peter reached the shore without mishap, and 
went straight on, his legs encountering the water 
as if quite unaware that they had entered a new 
element. Thus many animals pass from land to 
water, but no other human of whom I know. As 
he swam he had but one thought: "Hook or me 
this time." He had ticked so long that he now 
went on ticking without knowing that he was 
doing it. Had he known he would have stopped, 
for to board the brig by the help of the tick, though 
an ingenious idea, had not occurred to him. 

On the contrary, he thought he had scaled her 
side as noiseless as a mouse; and he was amazed to 
see the pirates cowering from him, with Hook in 
their midst as abject as if he had heard the croco- 
dile. 

The crocodile ! No sooner did Peter remember 
it than he heard the ticking. At first he thought 
the sound did come from the crocodile, and he 
looked behind him swiftly. Then he realized that 
he was doing it himself, and in a flash he under- 
stood the situation. "How clever of me!" he 

i 7 8 



"HOOK OR ME THIS TIME" 

thought at once, and signed to the boys not to 
burst into applause. 

It was at this moment that Ed Teynte the quar- 
termaster emerged from the forecastle and came 
along the deck. Now, reader, time what hap- 
pened by your watch. Peter struck true and deep. 
John clapped his hands on the ill-fated pirate's 
mouth to stifle the dying groan. He fell forward. 
Four boys caught him to prevent the thud. Peter 
gave the signal, and the carrion was cast over- 
board. There was a splash, and then silence. 
How long has it taken? 

"One !" (Slightly had begun to count.) 

None too soon, Peter, every inch of him on tip- 
toe, vanished into the cabin; for more than one 
pirate was screwing up his courage to look round. 
They could hear each other's distressed breathing 
now, which showed them that the more terrible 
sound had passed. 

"It's gone, captain," Smee said, wiping his spec- 
tacles. "All's still again." 

Slowly Hook let his head emerge from his ruff, 
and listened so intently that he could have caught 
the echo of the tick. There was not a sound, and 
he drew himself up firmly to his full height. 

"Then here's to Johnny Plank!" he cried 
brazenly, hating the boys more than ever because 
they had seen him unbend. He broke into the 
villainous ditty : 

179 



PETER AND WENDY 

"Yo ho, yo ho, the frisky plank, 

You walks along it so, 
Till it goes down and you goes down 
To Davy Jones below!" 

To terrorise the prisoners the more, though with 
a certain loss of dignity, he danced along an imag- 
inary plank, grimacing at them as he sang; and 
when he finished he cried, "Do you want a touch 
of the cat before you walk the plank ?" 

At that they fell on their knees. "No, no!" 
they cried so piteously that every pirate smiled. 

"Fetch the cat, Jukes," said Hook, "it's in the 
cabin." 

The cabin ! Peter was in the cabin ! The chil- 
dren gazed at each other. 

"Ay, ay," said Jukes blithely, and he strode into 
the cabin. They followed him with their eyes; 
they scarce knew that Hook had resumed his song, 
his dogs joining in with him: 

" Yo ho, yo ho, the scratching cat, 

Its tails are nine, you know, 
And when they're writ upon your back — " 

What was the last line will never be known, for 
of a sudden the song was stayed by a dreadful 
screech from the cabin. It wailed through the 
ship, and died away. Then was heard a crowing 
sound which was well understood by the boys, but 

180 



"HOOK OR ME THIS TIME" 

to the pirates was almost more eerie than the 
screech. 

"What was that?" cried Hook. 

"Two," said Slightly solemnly. 

The Italian Cecco hesitated for a moment and 
then swung into the cabin. He tottered out, hag- 
gard. 

"What's the matter with Bill Jukes, you dog?" 
hissed Hook, towering over him. 

"The matter wi' him is he's dead, stabbed," re- 
plied Cecco in a hollow voice. 

"Bill Jukes dead!" cried the startled pirates. 

"The cabin's as black as a pit," Cecco said, al- 
most gibbering, "but there is something terrible in 
there: the thing you heard crowing." 

The exultation of the boys, the lowering looks 
of the pirates, both were seen by Hook. 

"Cecco," he said in his most steely voice, "go 
back and fetch me out that doodle-doo." 

Cecco, bravest of the brave, cowered before his 
captain, crying, "No, no"; but Hook was purring 
to his claw. 

"Did you say you would go, Cecco?" he said 
musingly. 

Cecco went, first flinging up his arms despair- 
ingly. There was no more singing, all listened 
now; and again came a death-screech and again a 
crow. 

No one spoke except Slightly. "Three," he said. 
181 



PETER AND WENDY 

Hook rallied his dogs with a gesture. "S'death 
and odds fish," he thundered, "who is to bring me 
that doodle-doo?" 

"Wait till Cecco comes out," growled Starkey, 
and the others took up the cry. 

"I think I heard you volunteer, Starkey," said 
Hook, purring again. 

"No, by thunder!" Starkey cried. 

"My hook thinks you did," said Hook, crossing 
to him. "I wonder if it would not be advisable, 
Starkey, to humour the hook?" 

"I'll swing before I go in there," replied 
Starkey doggedly, and again he had the support of 
the crew. 

"Is it mutiny?" asked Hook more pleasantly 
than ever. "Starkey' s ringleader!" 

"Captain, mercy !" Starkey whimpered, all of a 
tremble now. 

"Shake hands, Starkey," said Hook, proffering 
his claw. 

Starkey looked round for help, but all deserted 
him. As he backed Hook advanced, and now the 
red spark was in his eye. With a despairing scream 
the pirate leapt upon Long Tom and precipitated 
himself into the sea. 

"Four," said Slightly. 

"And now," Hook asked courteously, "did any 
other gentleman say mutiny?" Seizing a lantern 
and raising his claw with a menacing gesture, "I'll 
182 



"HOOK OR ME THIS TIME" 

bring out that doodle-doo myself," he said, and 
sped into the cabin. 

"Five." How Slightly longed to say it. He 
wetted his lips to be ready, but Hook came stag- 
gering out, without his lantern. 

"Something blew out the light," he said a little 
unsteadily. 

"Something!" echoed Mullins. 

"What of Cecco?" demanded Noodler. 

"He's as dead as Jukes," said Hook shortly. 

His reluctance to return to the cabin impressed 
them all unfavourably, and the mutinous sounds 
again broke forth. All pirates are superstitious, 
and Cookson cried, "They do say the surest sign a 
ship's accurst is when there's one on board more 
than can be accounted for." 

"I've heard," muttered Mullins, "he always 
boards the pirate craft at last. Had he a tail, cap- 
tain?" 

"They say," said another, looking viciously at 
Hook, "that when he comes it's in the likeness of 
the wickedest man aboard." 

"Had he a hook, captain?" asked Cookson in- 
solently; and one after another took up the cry, 
"The ship's doomed!" At this the children could 
not resist raising a cheer. Hook had well-nigh 
forgotten his prisoners, but as he swung round on 
them now his face lit up again. 

"Lads," he cried to his crew, "here's a notion. 

183 



PETER AND WENDY 

Open the cabin door and drive them in. Let them 
fight the doodle-doo for their lives. If they kill 
him, we're so much the better; if he kills them, 
we're none the worse." 

For the last time his dogs admired Hook, and 
devotedly they did his bidding. The boys, pre- 
tending to struggle, were pushed into the cabin and 
the door was closed on them. 

"Now, listen!" cried Hook, and all listened. 
But not one dared to face the door. Yes, one, 
Wendy, who all this time had been bound to the 
mast. It was for neither a scream nor a crow that 
she was watching, it was for the reappearance of 
Peter. 

She had not long to wait. In the cabin he had 
found the thing for which he had gone in search : 
the key that would free the children of their 
manacles, and now they all stole forth, armed with 
such weapons as they could find. First signing to 
them to hide, Peter cut Wendy's bonds, and then 
nothing could have been easier than for them all 
to fly off together; but one thing barred the way, 
an oath, "Hook or me this time." So when he had 
freed Wendy, he whispered to her to conceal her- 
self with the others, and himself took her place by 
the mast, her cloak around him so that he should 
pass for her. Then he took a great breath and 
crowed. 

To the pirates it was a voice crying that all the 

184 



"HOOK OR ME THIS TIME" 

boys lay slain in the cabin; and they were panic- 
stricken. Hook tried to hearten them, but like 
the dogs he had made them they showed him their 
fangs, and he knew that if he took his eyes off 
them now they would leap at him. 

"Lads," he said, ready to cajole or strike as 
need be, but never quailing for an instant, "I've 
thought it out. There's a Jonah aboard." 

"Ay," they snarled, "a man wi' a hook." 

"No, lads, no, it's the girl. Never was luck on 
a pirate ship wi' a woman on board. We'll right 
the ship when she's gone." 

Some of them remembered that this had been a 
saying of Flint's. "It's worth trying," they said 
doubtfully. 

"Fling the girl overboard," cried Hook; and 
they made a rush at the figure in the cloak. 

"There's none can save you now, missy," Mul- 
lins hissed jeeringly. 

"There's one," replied the figure. 

"Who's that?" 

"Peter Pan the avenger!" came the terrible 
answer; and as he spoke Peter flung off his cloak. 
Then they all knew who 'twas that had been un- 
doing them in the cabin, and twice Hook essayed 
to speak and twice he failed. In that frightful 
moment I think his fierce heart broke. 

At last he cried, "Cleave him to the brisket!" 
but without conviction. 

185 



PETER AND WENDY 

"Down, boys, and at them!" Peter's voice rang 
out; and in another moment the clash of arms was 
resounding through the ship. Had the pirates 
kept together it is certain that they would have 
won; but the onset came when they were all un- 
strung, and they ran hither and thither, striking 
wildly, each thinking himself the last survivor of 
the crew. Man to man they were the stronger; 
but they fought on the defensive only, which 
enabled the boys to hunt in pairs and choose their 
quarry. Some of the miscreants leapt into the 
sea, others hid in dark recesses, where they were 
found by Slightly, who did not fight, but ran 
about with a lantern which he flashed in their 
faces, so that they were half blinded and fell an 
easy prey to the reeking swords of the other boys. 
There was little sound to be heard but the clang 
of weapons, an occasional screech or splash, and 
Slightly monotonously counting — five — six — 
seven — eight — nine — ten — eleven. 

I think all were gone when a group of savage 
boys surrounded Hook, who seemed to have a 
charmed life, as he kept them at bay in that circle 
of fire. They had done for his dogs, but this man 
alone seemed to be a match for them all. Again 
and again they closed upon him, and again and 
again he hewed a clear space. He had lifted 
up one boy with his hook, and was using him 
as a buckler, when another, who had just passed 

186 



"HOOK OR ME THIS TIME" 

his sword through Mullins, sprang into the 
fray. 

"Put up your swords, boys," cried the new- 
comer, "this man is mine." 

Thus suddenly Hook found himself face to face 
with Peter. The others drew back and formed a 
ring round them. 

For long the two enemies looked at one another, 
Hook shuddering slightly, and Peter with the 
strange smile upon his face. 

"So, Pan," said Hook at last, "this is all your 
doing." 

"Ay, James Hook," came the stern answer, "it 
is all my doing." 

"Proud and insolent youth," said Hook, "pre- 
pare to meet thy doom." 

"Dark and sinister man," Peter answered, "have 
at thee." 

Without more words they fell to, and for a 
space there was no advantage to either blade. 
Peter was a superb swordsman, and parried with 
dazzling rapidity; ever and anon he followed up 
a feint with a lunge that got past his foe's defence, 
but his shorter reach stood him in ill stead, and he 
could not drive the steel home. Hook, scarcely 
his inferior in brilliancy, but not quite so nimble 
in wrist play, forced him back by the weight of his 
onset, hoping suddenly to end all with a favourite 
thrust* taught him long ago by Barbecue at Rio; 

a87 



PETER AND WENDY 

but to his astonishment he found this thrust turned 
aside again and again. Then he sought to close 
and give the quietus with his iron hook, which all 
this time had been pawing the air; but Peter dou- 
bled under it and, lunging fiercely, pierced him in 
the ribs. At sight of his own blood, whose pecu- 
liar colour, you remember, was offensive to him, 
the sword fell from Hook's hand, and he was at 
Peter's mercy. 

"Now!" cried all the boys, but with a mag- 
nificent gesture Peter invited his opponent to pick 
up his sword. Hook did so instantly, but with a 
tragic feeling that Peter was showing good form. 

Hitherto he had thought it was some fiend 
fighting him, but darker suspicions assailed him 
now. 

"Pan, who and what art thou?" he cried 
huskily. 

c Tm youth, Pm joy," Peter answered at a ven- 
ture, "Pm a little bird that has broken out of the 

egg." 

This, of course, was nonsense; but it was proof 

to the unhappy Hook that Peter did not know in 

the least who or what he was, which is the very 

pinnacle of good form. 

"To't again," he cried despairingly. 

He fought now like a human flail, and every 
sweep of that terrible sword would have severed 
in twain any man or boy who obstructed it; but 

188 




'this man is mine" 



"HOOK OR ME THIS TIME" 

Peter fluttered round him as if the very wind it 
made blew him out of the danger zone. And 
again and again he darted in and pricked. 

Hook was fighting now without hope. That 
passionate breast no longer asked for life; but for 
one boon it craved: to see Peter bad form before 
it was cold for ever. 

Abandoning the fight he rushed into the powder 
magazine and fired it. 

"In two minutes/' he cried, "the ship will be 
blown to pieces." 

Now, now, he thought, true form will show. 

But Peter issued from the powder magazine 
with the shell in his hands, and calmly flung it 
overboard. 

What sort of form was Hook himself showing? 
Misguided man though he was, we may be glad, 
without sympathising with him, that in the end he 
was true to the traditions of his race. The other 
boys were flying around him now, flouting, scorn- 
ful ; and as he staggered about the deck striking up 
at them impotently, his mind was no longer with 
them ; it was slouching in the playing fields of long 
ago, or being sent up for good, or watching the 
wall-game from a famous wall. And his shoes 
were right, and his waistcoat was right, and his tie 
was right, and his socks were right. 

James Hook, thou not wholly unheroic figure, 
farewell. 

189 



PETER AND WENDY 

For we have come to his last moment. 

Seeing Peter slowly advancing upon him 
through the air with dagger poised, he sprang 
upon the bulwarks to cast himself into the sea. 
He did not know that the crocodile was waiting 
for him; for we purposely stopped the clock that 
this knowledge might be spared him : a little mark 
of respect from us at the end. 

He had one last triumph, which I think we need 
not grudge him. As he stood on the bulwark 
looking over his shoulder at Peter gliding through 
the air, he invited him with a gesture to use his 
foot. It made Peter kick instead of stab. 

At last Hook had got the boon for which he 
craved. 

"Bad form," he cried jeeringly, and went con- 
tent to the crocodile. 

Thus perished James Hook. 

"Seventeen," Slightly sang out; but he was not 
quite correct in his figures. Fifteen paid the pen- 
alty for their crimes that night; but two reached 
the shore : Starkey to be captured by the redskins, 
who made him nurse for all their papooses, a mel- 
ancholy come-down for a pirate; and Smee, who 
henceforth wandered about the world in his spec- 
tacles, making a precarious living by saying he was 
the only man that Jas. Hook had feared. 

Wendy, of course, had stood by taking no part 
in the fight, though watching Peter with glistening 

190 



"HOOK OR ME THIS TIME" 

eyes; but now that all was over she became promi- 
nent again. She praised them equally, and shud- 
dered delightfully when Michael showed her the 
place where he had killed one; and then she took 
them into Hook's cabin and pointed to his watch 
which was hanging on a nail. It said "half-past 
one" ! 

The lateness of the hour was almost the biggest 
thing of all. She got them to bed in the pirates' 
bunks pretty quickly, you may be sure; all but 
Peter, who strutted up and down on deck, until at 
last he fell asleep by the side of Long Tom. He 
had one of his dreams that night, and cried in his 
sleep for a long time, and Wendy held him tight. 



191 



CHAPTER XVI 

THE RETURN HOME 

By three bells next morning they were all stirring 
their stumps. For there was a big sea running, and 
Tootles, the bo'sun, was among them, with a 
rope's end in his hand and chewing tobacco. They 
all donned pirate clothes cut off at the knee, 
shaved smartly, and tumbled up, with the true 
nautical roll and hitching their trousers. 

It need not be said who was the captain. Nibs 
and John were first and second mate. There was 
a woman aboard. The rest were tars before the 
mast, and lived in the fo'c'sle. Peter had already 
lashed himself to the wheel ; but he piped all hands 
and delivered a short address to them; said he 
hoped they would do their duty like gallant 
hearties, but that he knew they were the scum of 
Rio and the Gold Coast, and if they snapped at 
him he would tear them. His bluff strident words 
struck the note sailors understand, and they 
cheered him lustily. Then a few sharp orders 
were given, and they turned the ship round, and 
nosed her for the mainland. 

192 



THE RETURN HOME 

Captain Pan calculated, after consulting the 
ship's chart, that if this weather lasted, they 
should strike the Azores about the 2ist of June, 
after which it would save time to fly. 

Some of them wanted it to be an honest ship 
and others were in favour of keeping it a pirate; 
but the captain treated them as dogs, and they 
dared not express their wishes to him even in a 
round robin. Instant obedience was the only safe 
thing. Slightly got a dozen for looking perplexed 
when told to take soundings. The general feeling 
was that Peter was honest just now to lull 
Wendy's suspicions, but that there might be a 
change when the new suit was ready, which, 
against her will, she was making for him out of 
some of Hook's wickedest garments. It was after- 
wards whispered among them that on the first 
night he wore this suit he sat long in the cabin 
with Hook's cigar-holder in his mouth and one 
hand clenched, all but the forefinger, which he 
bent and held threateningly aloft like a hook. 

Instead of watching the ship, however, we must 
now return to that desolate home from which 
three of our characters had taken heartless flight 
so long ago. It seems a shame to have neglected 
No. 14 all this time; and yet we may be sure that 
Mrs. Darling does not blame us. If we had re- 
turned sooner to look with sorrowful sympathy at 
her, she would probably have cried, "Don't be 

193 



PETER AND WENDY 

silly, what do I matter? Do go back and keep an 
eye on the children." So long as mothers are like 
this their children will take advantage of them; 
and they may lay to that. 

Even now we venture into that familiar nursery 
only because its lawful occupants are on their way 
home; we are merely hurrying on in advance of 
them to see that their beds are properly aired and 
that Mr. and Mrs. Darling do not go out for the 
evening. We are no more than servants. Why 
on earth should their beds be properly aired, see- 
ing that they left them in such a thankless hurry? 
Would it not serve them jolly well right if they 
came back and found that their parents were 
spending the week-end in the country? It would 
be the moral lesson they have been in need of ever 
since we met them; but if we contrived things in 
this way Mrs. Darling would never forgive us. 

One thing I should like to do immensely, and 
that is to tell her, in the way authors have, that 
the children are coming back, that indeed they will 
be here on Thursday week. This would spoil so 
completely the surprise to which Wendy and John 
and Michael are looking forward. They have 
been planning it out on the ship : mother's rapture, 
father's shout of joy, Nana's leap through the air 
to embrace them first, when what they ought to be 
preparing for is a good hiding. How delicious to 
spoil it all by breaking the news in advance; so 

194 



THE RETURN HOME 

that when they enter grandly Mrs. Darling may 
not even offer Wendy her mouth, and Mr. Darling 
may exclaim pettishly, "Dash it all, here are 
those boys again." However, we should get no 
thanks even for this. We are beginning to know 
Mrs. Darling by this time, and may be sure that 
she would upbraid us for depriving the children of 
their little pleasure. 

"But, my dear madam, it is ten days till Thurs- 
day week; so that by telling you what's what, we 
can save you ten days of unhappiness." 

"Yes, but at what a cost! By depriving the 
children of ten minutes of delight." 

"Oh, if you look at it in that way !" 

"What other way is there in which to look at 
it?" 

You see, the woman had no proper spirit. I 
had meant to say extraordinarily nice things about 
her; but I despise her, and not one of them will 
I say now. She does not really need to be told to 
have things ready, for they are ready. All the 
beds are aired, and she never leaves the house, 
and observe, the window is open. For all the use 
we are to her, we might go back to the ship. How- 
ever, as we are here we may as well stay and look 
on. That is all we are,, lookers-on. Nobody really 
wants us. So let us watch and say jaggy things, 
in the hope that some of them will hurt. 

The only change to be seen in the night-nursery 

195 



PETER AND WENDY 

is that between nine and six the kennel is no 
longer there. When the children flew away, Mr. 
Darling felt in his bones that all the blame was his 
for having chained Nana up, and that from first 
to last she had been wiser than he. Of course, as 
we have seen, he was quite a simple man; indeed 
he might have passed for a boy again if he had 
been able to take his baldness off; but he had also 
a noble sense of justice and a lion courage to do 
what seemed right to him; and having thought 
the matter out with anxious care after the flight 
of the children, he went down on all fours and 
crawled into the kennel. To all Mrs. Darling's 
dear invitations to him to come out he replied 
sadly but firmly : 

"No, my own one, this is the place for me" 

In the bitterness of his remorse he swore that he 
would never leave the kennel until his children 
came back. Of course this was a pity; but what- 
ever Mr. Darling did he had to do in excess, 
otherwise he soon gave up doing it. And there 
never was a more humble man than the once proud 
George Darling, as he sat in the kennel of an 
evening talking with his wife of their children 
and all their pretty ways. 

Very touching was his deference to Nana. He 
would not let her come into the kennel, but on all 
other matters he followed her wishes implicitly. 

Every morning the kennel was carried with Mr. 
196 



THE RETURN HOME 

Darling in it to a cab, which conveyed him to his 
office, and he returned home in the same way at 
six. Something of the strength of character of 
the man will be seen if we remember how sensitive 
he was to the opinion of neighbours: this man 
whose every movement now attracted surprised at- 
tention. Inwardly he must have suffered torture; 
but he preserved a calm exterior even when the 
young criticised his little home, and he always 
lifted his hat courteously to any lady who looked 
inside. 

It may have been quixotic, but it was magnifi- 
cent. Soon the inward meaning of it leaked out, 
and the great heart of the public was touched. 
Crowds followed the cab, cheering it lustily; 
charming girls scaled it to get his autograph; in- 
terviews appeared in the better class of papers, 
and society invited him to dinner and added, "Do 
come in the kennel." 

On that eventful Thursday week Mrs. Darling 
was in the night-nursery awaiting George's return 
home : a very sad-eyed woman. Now that we look 
at her closely and remember the gaiety of her in 
the old days, all gone now just because she has lost 
her babes, I find I won't be able to say nasty 
things about her after all. If she was too fond 
of her rubbishy children she couldn't help it. Look 
at her in her chair, where she has fallen asleep. 
The corner of her mouth, where one looks first, is 

197 



PETER AND WENDY 

almost withered up. Her hand moves restlessly on 
her breast as if she had a pain there. Some like 
Peter best and some like Wendy best, but I like 
her best. Suppose, to make her happy, we whis- 
per to her in her sleep that the brats are coming 
back. They are really within two miles of the 
window now, and flying strong, but all we need 
whisper is that they are on the way. Let's. 

It is a pity we did it, for she has started up, 
calling their names; and there is no one in the 
room but Nana. 

"O Nana, I dreamt my dear ones had come 
back." 

Nana had filmy eyes, but all she could do was 
to put her paw gently on her mistress's lap, and 
they were sitting together thus when the kennel 
was brought back. As Mr. Darling puts his head 
out at it to kiss his wife, we see that his face is 
more worn than of yore, but has a softer expres- 
sion. 

He gave his hat to Liza, who took it scorn- 
fully; for she had no imagination, and was quite 
incapable of understanding the motives of such a 
man. Outside, the crowd who had accompanied 
the cab home were still cheering, and he was natu- 
rally not unmoved. 

"Listen to them," he said; "it is very gratify- 
ing." 

"Lot of little boys," sneered Liza. 

LI98 



THE RETURN HOME 

"There were several adults to-day," he assured 
her with a faint flush; but when she tossed her 
head he had not a word of reproof for her. Social 
success had not spoilt him; it had made him 
sweeter. For some time he sat with his head out 
of the kennel, talking with Mrs. Darling of this 
success, and pressing her hand reassuringly when I 
she said she hoped his head would not be turned 
by it. 

"But if I had been a weak man," he said. 
"Good heavens, if I had been a weak man !" 

"And, George," she said timidly, "you are as 
full of remorse as ever, aren't you*?" 

"Full of remorse as ever, dearest ! See my pun- 
ishment : living in a kennel." 

"But it is punishment, isn't it, George? You 
are sure you are not enjoying it?" 

"My love !" 

You may be sure she begged his pardon; and 
then, feeling drowsy, he curled round in the 
kennel. 

"Won't you play me to sleep," he asked, "on 
the nursery piano?" and as she was crossing to the 
day-nursery he added thoughtlessly, "and shut 
that window. I feel a draught." 

"O George, never ask me to do that. The win- 
dow must always be left open for them, always, 
always." 

Now it was his turn to beg her pardon; and she 
199 



PETER AND WENDY 

went into the day-nursery and played, and soon he 
was asleep; and while he slept, Wendy and John 
and Michael flew into the room. 

Oh no. We have written it so, because that 
was the charming arrangement planned by them 
before we left the ship ; but something must have 
happened since then, for it is not they who have 
flown in, it is Peter and Tinker Bell. 

Peter's first words tell all. 

"Quick, Tink," he whispered, "close the win- 
dow; bar it ! That's right. Now you and I must 
get away by the door; and when Wendy comes 
she will think her mother has barred her out, and 
she will have to go back with me." 

Now I understand what had hitherto puzzled 
me, why when Peter had exterminated the pirates 
he did not return to the island and leave Tink to 
escort the children to the mainland. This trick 
had been in his head all the time. 

Instead of feeling that he was behaving badly 
he danced with glee ; then he peeped into the day- 
nursery to see who was playing. He whispered to 
Tink, "It's Wendy's mother ! She is a pretty lady, 
but not so pretty as my mother. Her mouth is 
full of thimbles, but not so full as my mother's 
was." 

Of course he knew nothing whatever about his 
mother; but he sometimes bragged about her. 

He did not know the tune, which was "Home, 
200 



THE RETURN HOME 

Sweet Home," but he knew it was saying, "Come 
back, Wendy, Wendy, Wendy"; and he cried 
exultantly, "You will never see Wendy again, 
lady, for the window is barred!" 

He peeped in again to see why the music had 
stopped, and now he saw that Mrs. Darling had 
laid her head on the box, and that two tears were 
sitting on her eyes. 

"She wants me to unbar the window," thought 
Peter, "but I won't, not I !" 

He peeped again, and the tears were still there, 
or another two had taken their place. 

"She's awfully fond of Wendy," he said to 
himself. He was angry with her now for not 
seeing why she could not have Wendy. 

The reason was so simple: "I'm fond of her 
too. We can't both have her, lady." 

But the lady would not make the best of it, and 
he was unhappy. He ceased to look at her, but 
even then she would not let go of him. He 
skipped about and made funny faces, but when 
he stopped it was just as if she were inside him, 
knocking. 

"Oh, all right," he said at last, and gulped. 
Then he unbarred the window. "Come on, Tink," 
he cried, with a frightful sneer at the laws of na- 
ture; "we don't want any silly mothers"; and he 
flew away. 

Thus Wendy and John and Michael found the 
201 



PETER AND WENDY 

window open for them after all, which of course 
was more than they deserved. They alighted 
on the floor, quite unashamed of themselves, 
and the youngest one had already forgotten his 
home. 

"John," he said, looking around him doubt- 
fully, "I think I have been here before." 

"Of course you have, you silly. There is your 
old bed." 

"So it is," Michael said, but not with much con- 
viction. 

"I say," cried John, "the kennel!" and he 
dashed across to look into it. 

"Perhaps Nana is inside it," Wendy said. 

But John whistled. "Hullo," he said, "there's 
a man inside it." 

"It's father !" exclaimed Wendy. 

"Let me see father," Michael begged eagerly, 
and he took a good look. "He is not so big as 
the pirate I killed," he said with such frank dis- 
appointment that I am glad Mr. Darling was 
asleep; it would have been sad if those had been 
the first words he heard his little Michael say. 

Wendy and John had been taken aback some- 
[what at finding their father in the kennel. 

"Surely," said John, like one who had lost faith 
in his memory, "he used not to sleep in the 
kennel?" 
4 "John," Wendy said falteringly, "perhaps we 

202 



THE RETURN HOME 

don't remember the old life as well as we thought 
we did." 

A chill fell upon them; and serve them right. 

"It is very careless of mother," said that young 
scoundrel John, "not to be here when we come 
back." 

It was then that Mrs. Darling began playing 
again. 

"It's mother!" cried Wendy, peeping. 

"So it is !" said John. 

"Then are you not really our mother, Wendy?" 
asked Michael, who was surely sleepy. 

"Oh dear!" exclaimed Wendy, with her first 
real twinge of remorse, "it was quite time we came 
back." 

"Let us creep in," John suggested, "and put our 
hands over her eyes." 

But Wendy, who saw that they must break the 
joyous news more gently, had a better plan. 

"Let us all slip into our beds, and be there when 
she comes in, just as if we had never been away." 

And so when Mrs. Darling went back to the 
night-nursery to see if her husband was asleep, all 
the beds were occupied. The children waited for 
her cry of joy, but it did not come. She saw them, 
but she did not believe they were there. You 
see, she saw them in their beds so often in her 
dreams that she thought this was just the dream 
hanging around her still. 

203 



PETER AND WENDY 

She sat down in the chair by the fire, where in 
the old days she had nursed them. 

They could not understand this, and a cold fear 
fell upon all the three of them. 

"Mother!" Wendy cried. 

'That's Wendy," she said, but still she was 
sure it was the dream. 

"Mother!" 

"That's John," she said. 

"Mother !" cried Michael. He knew her now. 

"That's Michael," she said, and she stretched 
out her arms for the three little selfish children 
they would never envelop again. Yes, they did, 
they went round Wendy and John and Michael, 
who had slipped out of bed and run to her. 

"George, George!" she cried when she could 
speak; and Mr. Darling woke to share her bliss, 
and Nana came rushing in. There could not have 
been a lovelier sight; but there was none to see it 
except a little boy who was staring in at the win- 
dow. He had ecstasies innumerable that other 
children can never know; but he was looking 
through the window at the one joy from which 
he must be for ever barred. 



204 



CHAPTER XVII 

WHEN WENDY GREW UP 

I hope you want to know what became of the 
other boys. They were waiting below to give 
Wendy time to explain about them, and when 
they had counted five hundred they went up. They 
went up by the stair, because they thought this 
would make a better impression. They stood in a 
row in front of Mrs. Darling, with their hats off, 
and wishing they were not wearing their pirate 
clothes. They said nothing, but their eyes asked 
her to have them. They ought to have looked at 
Mr. Darling also, but they forgot about him. 

Of course Mrs. Darling said at once that she 
would have them ; but Mr. Darling was curiously 
depressed, and they saw that he considered six a 
rather large number. 

C T must say," he said to Wendy, "that you 
don't do things by halves," a grudging remark 
which the twins thought was pointed at them. 

The first twin was the proud one, and he asked, 
flushing, "Do you think we should be too much 
of a handful, sir? Because if so we can go away." 

205 



PETER AND WENDY 

"Father !" Wendy cried, shocked; but still the 
cloud was on him. He knew he was behaving un- 
worthily, but he could not help it. 

"We could lie doubled up," said Nibs. 

"I always cut their hair myself," said Wendy. 

"George!" Mrs. Darling exclaimed, pained to 
see her dear one showing himself in such an unfa- 
vourable light. 

Then he burst into tears, and the truth came 
out. He was as glad to have them as she was, he 
said, but he thought they should have asked his 
consent as well as hers, instead of treating him as 
a cypher in his own house. 

"I don't think he is a cypher," Tootles cried 
instantly. "Do you think he is a cypher, Curly?" 

"No I don't. Do you think he is a cypher, 
Slightly?" 

"Rather not. Twin, what do you think?" 

It turned out that not one of them thought him 
a cypher; and he was absurdly gratified, and said 
he would find space for them all in the drawing- 
room if they fitted in. 

"We'll fit in, sir," they assured him. 

"Then follow the leader," he cried gaily. 
"Mind you, I am not sure that we have a draw- 
ing-room, but we pretend we have, and it's all the 
same. Hoopla!" 

He went off dancing through the house, and 
they all cried "Hoop la !" and danced after him, 

206 



WHEN WENDY GREW UP 

searching for the drawing-room; and I forget 
whether they found it, but at any rate they found 
corners, and they all fitted in. 

As for Peter, he saw Wendy once again before 
he flew away. He did not exactly come to the 
window, but he brushed against it in passing, so 
that she could open it if she liked and call to him. 
That was what she did. 

"Hullo, Wendy, good-bye," he said. 

"Oh dear, are you going away?" 

"Yes." 

"You don't feel, Peter," she said falteringly, 
"that you would like to say anything to my par- 
ents about a very sweet subject?" 

"No." 

"About me, Peter?" 

"No." 

Mrs. Darling came to the window, for at pres- 
ent she was keeping a sharp eye on Wendy. She 
told Peter that she had adopted all the other boys, 
and would like to adopt him also. 

"Would you send me to school?" he inquired 
craftily. 

"Yes." 

"And then to an office?" 

"I suppose so." 

"Soon I should be a man?" 

"Very soon." 

"I don't want to go to school and learn solemn 
207 



PETER AND WENDY 

things," he told her passionately. "I don't want 
to be a man. Wendy's mother, if I was to wake 
up and feel there was a beard !" 

"Peter," said Wendy the comforter, "I should 
love you in a beard;" and Mrs. Darling stretched 
out her arms to him, but he repulsed her. 

"Keep back, lady, no one is going to catch me 
and make me a man." 

"But where are you going to live?" 

"With Tink in the house we built for Wendy. 
The fairies are to put it high up among the tree 
tops where they sleep at nights." 

"How lovely," cried Wendy so longingly that 
Mrs. Darling tightened her grip. 

"I thought all the fairies were dead," Mrs. 
Darling said. 

"There are always a lot of young ones," ex- 
plained Wendy, who was now quite an authority, 
"because you see when a new baby laughs for the 
first time a new fairy is born, and as there are 
always new babies there are always new fairies. 
They live in nests on the tops .of trees; and the 
mauve ones are boys and the white ones are girls, 
and the blue ones are just little sillies who are not 
sure what they are." 

"I shall have such fun," said Peter, with one 
eye on Wendy. 

"It will be rather lonely in the evening," she 
said, "sitting by the fire." 

208 



WHEN WENDY GREW UP 

"I shall have Tink." 

"Tink can't go a twentieth part of the way 
round," she reminded him a little tartly. 

"Sneaky tell-tale !" Tink called out from some- 
where round the corner. 

"It doesn't matter," Peter said. 

"O Peter, you know it matters." 

"Well, then, come with me to the little house." 

"May I, mummy?" 

"Certainly not. I have got you home again, 
and I mean to keep you." 

"But he does so need a mother." 

"So do you, my love." 

"Oh, all right," Peter said, as if he had asked 
her from politeness merely; but Mrs. Darling saw 
his mouth twitch, and she made this handsome 
offer: to let Wendy go to him for a week every 
year and do his spring cleaning. Wendy would 
have preferred a more permanent arrangement, 
and it seemed to her that spring would be long in 
coming, but this promise sent Peter away quite 
gay again. He had no .sense of time, and was so 
full of adventures that all I have told you about 
him is only a halfpenny worth of them. I sup- 
pose it was because Wendy knew this that her last 
words to him were these rather plaintive ones : 

"You won't forget me, Peter, will you, before 
spring-cleaning time comes?" 

Of course Peter promised, and then he flew 
209 



PETER AND WENDY 

away. He took Mrs. Darling's kiss with him. 
The kiss that had been for no one else Peter took 
quite easily. Funny. But she seemed satisfied. 

Of course all the boys went to school ; and most 
of them got into Class in., but Slightly was put 
first into Class iv. and then into Class v. Class i. 
is the top class. Before they had attended school 
a week they saw what goats they had been not 
to remain on the island; but it was too late now, 
and soon they settled down to being as ordinary 
as you or me or Jenkins minor. It is sad to have 
to say that the power to fly gradually left them. 
At first Nana .tied their feet to the bed-posts so 
that they should not fly away in the night; and 
one of their diversions by day was to pretend to 
fall off buses; but by and by they ceased to tug 
at their bonds in bed, and found that they hurt 
themselves when they let go of the bus. In time 
they could not even fly after their hats. Want of 
practice, they called it; but what it really meant 
was that they no longer believed. 

Michael believed longer than the other boys, 
though they jeered at him; so he was with Wendy 
when Peter came for her at the end of the first 
year. She flew away with Peter in the frock she 
had woven from leaves and berries in the Never- 
land, and her one fear was that he might notice 
how short it had become, but he never noticed, 
he had so much to say about himself. 

210 



WHEN WENDY GREW UP 

She had looked forward to thrilling talks with 
him about old times, but new adventures had 
crowded the old ones from his mind. 

"Who is Captain Hook?" he asked with inter- 
est when she spoke of the arch enemy. 

"Don't you remember," she asked, amazed, 
"how you killed him and saved all our lives?" 

"I forget them after I kill them," he replied 
carelessly. 

When she expressed a doubtful hope that 
Tinker Bell would be glad to see her he said, 
"Who is Tinker Bell?" 

"O Peter!" she said, shocked; but even when 
she explained he could not remember. 

"There are such a lot of them," he said. "I 
expect she is no more." 

I expect he was right, for fairies don't live long, 
but they are so little that a short time seems a 
good while to them. 

Wendy was pained too to find that the past 
year was but as yesterday to Peter; it had seemed 
such a long year of waiting to her. But he was 
exactly as fascinating as ever, and they had a 
lovely spring cleaning in the little house on the 
tree tops. 

Next year he did not come for her. She waited 
in a new frock because the old one simply would 
not meet, but he never came. 

"Perhaps he is ill," Michael said. 

211 



PETER AND WENDY 

"You know he is never ill." 

Michael came close to her and whispered, with 
a shiver, "Perhaps there is no such person, 
Wendy!" and then Wendy would have cried if 
Michael had not been crying. 

Peter came next spring cleaning; and the 
strange thing was that he never knew he had 
missed a year. 

That was the last time the girl Wendy ever 
saw him. For a little longer she tried for his sake 
not to have growing pains; and she felt she was 
untrue to him when she got a prize for general 
knowledge. But the years came and went without 
bringing the careless boy; and when they met 
again Wendy was a married woman, and Peter 
was no more to her than a little dust in the box 
in which she had kept her toys. Wendy was 
grown up. You need not be sorry for her. She 
was one of the kind that likes to grow up. In the 
end she grew up of her own free will a day quicker 
than other girls. 

All the boys were grown up and done for by 
this time; so it is scarcely worth while saying any- 
thing more about them. You may see the twins 
and Nibs and Curly any day going to an office, 
each carrying a little bag and an umbrella. 
Michael is an engine-driver. Slightly married a 
lady of title, and so he became a lord. You see 
that judge in a wig coming out at the iron door? 

212 



WHEN WENDY GREW UP 

That used to be Tootles. The bearded man who 
doesn't know any story to tell his children was 
once John. 

Wendy was married in white with a pink sash. 
It is strange to think that Peter did not alight in 
the church and forbid the banns. 

Years rolled on again, and Wendy had a 
daughter. This ought not to be written in ink but 
in a golden splash. 

She was called Jane, and always had an odd 
inquiring look, as if from the moment she arrived 
on the mainland she wanted to ask questions. 
When she was old enough to ask them they were 
mostly about Peter Pan. She loved to hear of 
Peter, and Wendy told her all she could remember 
in the very nursery from which the famous flight 
had taken place. It was Jane's nursery now, for 
her father had bought it at the three per cents, 
from Wendy's father, who was no longer fond 
of stairs. Mrs. Darling was now dead and for- 
gotten. 

There were only two beds in the nursery now, 
Jane's and her nurse's; and there was no kennel, 
for Nana also had passed away. She died of old 
age, and at the end she had been rather difficult 
to get on with, being very firmly convinced that 
no one knew how to look after children except 
herself. 

Once a week Jane's nurse had her evening off, 
213 



PETER AND WENDY 

and then it was Wendy's part to put Jane to bed. 
That was the time for stories. It was Jane's in- 
vention to raise the sheet over her mother's head 
and her own, thus making a tent, and in the awful 
darkness to whisper: — 

"What do we see now?" 

"I don't think I see anything to-night," says 
Wendy, with a feeling that if Nana were here 
she would object to further conversation. 

"Yes, you do," says Jane, "you see when you 
were a little girl." 

"That is a long time ago, sweetheart," says 
Wendy. "Ah me, how time flies!" 

"Does it fly," asks the artful child, "the way 
you flew when you were a little girl?" 

"The way I flew ! Do you know, Jane, I some- 
times wonder whether I ever did really fly." 

"Yes, you did." 

"The dear old days when I could fly !" 

"Why can't you fly now, mother?" 

"Because I am grown up, dearest. When peo- 
ple grow up they forget the way." 

"Why do they forget the way?" 

"Because they are no longer gay and innocent 
and heartless. It is only the gay and innocent and 
heartless who can fly." 

"What is gay and innocent and heartless? I 
do wish I was gay and innocent and heartless." 

Or perhaps Wendy admits she does see some- 
214 



WHEN WENDY GREW UP 

thing. "I do believe," she says, "that it is this 
nursery!" 

"I do believe it is!" says Jane. "Go on." 

They are now embarked on the great adventure 
of the night when Peter flew in looking for his 
shadow. 

"The foolish fellow," says Wendy, "tried to 
stick it on with soap, and when he could not he 
cried, and that woke me, and I sewed it on for 
him." 

"You have missed a bit," interrupts Jane, who 
now knows the story better than her mother. 
"When you saw him sitting on the floor crying 
what did you say?" 

"I sat up in bed and I said, 'Boy, why are you 
crying?' " 

"Yes, that was it," says Jane, with a big breath. 

"And then he flew us all away to the Never- 
land and the fairies and the pirates and the red- 
skins and the mermaids' lagoon, and the home 
under the ground, and the little house." 

"Yes! which did you like best of all?" 

"I think I liked the home under the ground 
best of all." 

"Yes, so do I. What was the last thing Peter 
ever said to you?" 

"The last thing he ever said to me was, 'Just 
always be waiting for me, and then some night 
you will hear me crowing.' " 

215 



PETER AND WENDY 

"Yes!" 

"But, alas, he forgot all about me." Wendy 
iaid it with a smile. She was as grown up as that. 

"What did his crow sound like?" Jane asked 
one evening. 

"It was like this," Wendy said, trying to imi- 
tate Peter's crow. 

"No, it wasn't," Jane said gravely, "it was like 
this" ; and she did it ever so much better than her 
.mother. 

Wendy was a little startled. "My darling, 
liow can you know?" 

"I often hear it when I am sleeping," Jane said. 

"Ah yes, many girls hear it when they are sleep- 
ing, but I was the only one who heard it awake." 

"Lucky you !" said Jane. 

And then one night came the tragedy. It was 
the spring of the year, and the story had been told 
for the night, and Jane was now asleep in her bed. 
Wendy was sitting on the floor, very close to the 
fire so as to see to darn, for there was no other light 
in the nursery; and while she sat darning she 
heard a crow. Then the window blew open as of 
old, and Peter dropped on the floor. 

He was exactly the same as ever, and Wendy 
saw at once that he still had all his first teeth. 

He was a little boy, and she was grown up. 
She huddled by the fire not daring to move, help- 
less and guilty, a big woman. 

216 




PETER AND JANE 



WHEN WENDY GREW UP 

"Hullo, Wendy," he said, not noticing any dif- 
ference, for he was thinking chiefly of himself; 
and in the dim light her white dress might have 
been the nightgown in which he had seen her first. 

"Hullo, Peter," she replied faintly, squeezing 
herself as small as possible. Something inside her 
was crying "Woman, woman, let go of me." 

"Hullo, where is John?" he asked, suddenly 
missing the third bed. 

"John is not here now," she gasped. 

"Is Michael asleep?" he asked, with a careless 
glance at Jane. 

"Yes," she answered; and now she felt that 
she was untrue to Jane as well as to Peter. 

"That is not Michael," she said quickly, lest a 
judgment should fall on her. 

Peter looked. "Hullo, is it a new one?" 

"Yes." 

"Boy or girl?" 

"Girl." 

Now surely he would understand; but not a 
bit of it. 

"Peter," she said, faltering, "are you expecting 
me to fly away with you?" 

"Of course; that is why I have come." He 
added a little sternly, "Have you forgotten that 
this is spring-cleaning time?" 

She knew it was useless to say that he had let 
many spring-cleaning times pass. 

217 



PETER AND WENDY 

"I can't come/' she said apologetically, "I have 
forgotten how to fly." 

"I'll soon teach you again." 

"O, Peter, don't waste the fairy dust on me." 

She had risen, and now at last a fear assailed 
him. "What is it?" he cried, shrinking. 

"I will turn up the light," she said, "and then 
you can see for yourself." 

For almost the only time in his life that I know 
of, Peter was afraid. "Don't turn up the light," 
he cried. 

She let her hands play in the hair of the tragic 
boy. She was not a little girl heart-broken about 
him ; she was a grown woman smiling at it all, but 
they were wet smiles. 

Then she turned up the light, and Peter saw. 
He gave a cry of pain ; and when the tall beautiful 
creature stooped to lift him in her arms he drew 
back sharply. 

"What is it?" he cried again. 

She had to tell him. 

"I am old, Peter. I am ever so much more than 
twenty. I grew up long ago." 

"You promised not to !" 
"I couldn't help it. I am a married woman, 
Peter." 

"No, you're not." 

"Yes, and the little girl in the bed is my baby." 
"No, she's not." 

218 



WHEN WENDY GREW UP 

But he supposed she was; and he took a step 
towards the sleeping child with his fist upraised. 
Of course he did not strike her. He sat down on 
the floor and sobbed, and Wendy did not know 
how to comfort him, though she could have done 
it so easily once. She was only a woman now, 
and she ran out of the room to try to think. 

Peter continued to cry, and soon his sobs woke 
Jane. She sat up in bed, and was interested at 
once. 

"Boy," she said, "why are you crying?" 

Peter rose and bowed to her, and she bowed to 
him from the bed. 

"Hullo," he said. 

"Hullo," said Jane. 

"My name is Peter Pan," he told her. 

"Yes, I know." 

"I came back for -my mother," he explained, 
"to take her to the Neverland." 

"Yes, I know," Jane said, "I been waiting for 
you." 

When Wendy returned diffidently she found 
Peter sitting on the bed-post crowing gloriously, 
while Jane in her nighty was flying round the 
room in solemn ecstasy. 

"She is my mother," Peter explained; and Jane 
descended and stood by his side, with the look on 
her face that he liked to see on ladies when they 
gazed at him. 

219 



PETER AND WENDY 

"He does so need a mother," Jane said. 

"Yes, I know," Wendy admitted, rather for- 
lornly; "no one knows it so well as J." 

"Good-bye," said Peter to Wendy; and he rose 
in the air, and the shameless Jane rose with him; 
it was already her easiest way of moving about. 

Wendy rushed to the window. 

"No, no!" she cried. 

"It is just for spring-cleaning time," Jane said; 
"he wants me always to do his spring cleaning." 

"If only I could go with you!" Wendy sighed, 

"You see you can't fly," said Jane. 

Of course in the end Wendy let them fly away 
together. Our last glimpse of her shows her at 
the window, watching them receding into the sky 
until they were as small as stars. 

As you look at Wendy you may see her hair be- 
coming white, and her figure little again, for all 
this happened long ago. Jane is now a common 
grown-up, with a daughter called Margaret; and 
every spring-cleaning time, except when he for- 
gets, Peter comes for Margaret and takes her to 
the Neverland, where she tells him stories about 
himself, to which he listens eagerly. When Mar- 
garet grows up she will have a daughter, who is to 
be Peter's mother in turn; and so it will go on, so 
long aB children are gay and innocent and heartless. 

THE END 

-220 



MARGARET OGILVY 

BY HER SON, J. M. BARRIE 



TO THE MEMORY OF 

MY SISTER JANE ANN 




MARGARET OGILVY 



CHAPTER I 

HOW MY MOTHER GOT HER SOFT FACE 

ON the day I was born we bought six hair- 
bottomed chairs, and in our little house it 
was an event, the first great victory in a woman's 
long campaign ; how they had been laboured for, 
the pound-note and the thirty threepenny bits they 
cost, what anxiety there was about the purchase, 
the- show they made in possession of the west 
room, my father's unnatural coolness when he 
brought them in (but his face was white) — I so 
often heard the tale afterwards, and shared as boy 
and man in so many similar triumphs, that the 
coming of the chairs seems to be something I re- 
member, as if I had jumped out of bed on that 
first day, and run ben to see how they looked. I 
am sure my mother's feet were ettling to be ben 
long before they could be trusted, and that the 
moment after she was left alone with me she was 
discovered barefooted in the west room, doctoring 
a scar (which she had been the first to detect) on 
one of the chairs, or sitting on them regally or 
withdrawing and re-opening the door suddenly to 
take the six by surprise. And then, I think, a 

225 



MARGARET OGILVY 

shawl was flung over her (it is strange to me to 
think it was not I who ran after her with the 
shawl), and she was escorted sternly back to bed 
and reminded that she had promised not to budge, 
to which her reply was probably that she had been 
gone but an instant, and the implication that there- 
fore she had not been gone at all. Thus was one 
little bit of her revealed to me at once : I wonder 
if I took note of it. Neighbours came in to see 
the boy and the chairs. I wonder if she deceived 
me when she affected to think that there were 
others like us, or whether I saw through her from 
the first, she was so easily seen through. When 
she seemed to agree with them that it would be 
impossible to give me a college education, was I 
so easily taken in, or did I know already what am- 
bitions burned behind that dear face ? when they 
spoke of the chairs as the goal quickly reached, 
was I such a newcomer that her timid lips must 
say " They are but a beginning " before I heard 
the words ? And when we were left together, did 
I laugh at the great things that were in her mind, 
or had she to whisper them to me first, and then 
did I put my arm round her and tell her that I 
would help ? Thus it was for such a long time : 
it is strange to me to feel that it was not so from 
the beginning. 

It is all guess-work for six years, and she whom 
I see in them is the woman who came suddenly 

226 



HER SOFT FACE 

into view when they were at an end. Her timid 
lips I have said, but they were not timid then, and 
when I knew her the timid lips had come. The 
soft face — they say the face was not so soft then. 
The shawl that was flung over her — we had not 
begun to hunt her with a shawl, nor to make our 
bodies a screen between her and the draughts, nor 
to creep into her room a score of times in the 
night to stand looking at her as she slept. We 
did not see her becoming little then, nor sharply 
turn our heads when she said wonderingly how 
small her arms had grown. In her happiest mo- 
ments — and never was a happier woman — her 
mouth did not of a sudden begin to twitch, and 
tears to lie on the mute blue eyes in which I have 
read all I know and would ever care to write. 
For when you looked into my mother's eyes you 
knew, as if He had told you, why God sent her 
into the world — it was to open the minds of all 
who looked to beautiful thoughts. And that is 
the beginning and end of literature. Those eyes 
that I cannot see until I was six years old have 
guided me through life, and I pray God they may 
remain my only earthly judge to the last. They 
were never more my guide than when I helped to 
put her to earth, not whimpering because my 
mother had been taken away after seventy-six 
glorious years of life, but exulting in her even 
at the grave. 

227 



MARGARET OGILVY 

She had a son who was far away at school. I 
remember very little about him, only that he was 
a merry-faced boy who ran like a squirrel up a 
tree and shook the cherries into my lap. When 
he was thirteen and I was half his age the terrible 
news came, and I have been told the face of my 
mother was awful in its calmness as she set off to 
get between Death and her boy. We trooped 
with her down the brae to the wooden station, and 
I think I was envying her the journey in the mys- 
terious waggons; I know we played around her, 
proud of our right to be there, but I do not recall 
it, I only speak from hearsay. Her ticket was 
taken, she had bidden us good-bye with that fight- 
ing face which I cannot see, and then my father 
came out of the telegraph-office and said huskily 
" He's gone ! " Then we turned very quietly and 
went home again up the little brae. But I speak 
from hearsay no longer; I knew my mother for 
ever now. 

That is how she got her soft face and her pa- 
thetic ways and her large charity, and why other 
mothers ran to her when they had lost a child. 
" Dinna greet, poor Janet," she would say to them, 
and they would answer, " Ah, Margaret, but you're 
greeting yourseP." Margaret Ogilvy had been her 
maiden name, and after the Scotch custom she was 
still Margaret Ogilvy to her old friends. Margaret 
Ogilvy I loved to name her. Often when I was a 

228 



HER SOFT FACE 

boy, " Margaret Ogilvy, are you there ? " I would 
call up the stair. 

She was always delicate from that hour, and for 
many months she was very ill. I have heard that 
the first thing she expressed a wish to see was the 
christening robe, and she looked long at it and 
then turned her face to the wall. That was what 
made me as a boy think of it always as the robe in 
which he was christened, but I knew later that we 
had all been christened in it, from the oldest of 
the family to the youngest, between whom stood 
twenty years. Hundreds of other children were 
christened in it also, such robes being then a rare 
possession, and the lending of ours among my 
mother's glories. It was carried carefully from 
house to house, as if it were itself a child; my 
mother made much of it, smoothed it out, petted 
it, smiled to it before putting it into the arms of 
those to whom it was being lent ; she was in our 
pew to see it borne magnificently (something in- 
side it now) down the aisle to the pulpit side, 
when a stir of expectancy went through the church 
and we kicked each other's feet beneath the book- 
board but were reverent in the face ; and however 
the child might behave, laughing brazenly or skirl- 
ing to its mother's shame, and whatever the father 
as he held it up might do, look doited probably 
and bow at the wrong time, the christening robe 
of long experience helped them through. And 

229 



MARGARET OGILVY 

when it was brought back to her she took it in her 
arms as softly as if it might be asleep, and uncon- 
sciously pressed it to her breast : there was never 
anything in the house that spoke to her quite so 
eloquently as that little white robe; it was the one 
of her children that always remained a baby. And 
she had not made it herself, which was the most 
wonderful thing about it to me, for she seemed to 
have made all other things. All the clothes in the 
house were of her making, and you don't know 
her in the least if you think they were out of the 
fashion; she turned them and made them new 
again, she beat them and made them new again, 
and then she coaxed them into being new again 
just for the last time, she let them out and took 
them in and put on new braid, and added a piece 
up the back, and thus they passed from one mem- 
ber of the family to another until they reached the 
youngest, and even when we were done with them 
they reappeared as something else. In the fashion! 
I must come back to this. Never was a woman 
with such an eye for it. She had no fashion-plates ; 
she did not need them. The minister's wife (a 
cloak), the banker's daughters (the new sleeve) — 
they had but to pass our window once, and the 
scalp, so to speak, was in my mother's hands. Ob- 
serve her rushing, scissors in hand, thread in mouth, 
to the drawers where her daughters' Sabbath clothes 
were kept. Or go to church next Sunday, and 

230 



HER SOFT FACE 

watch a certain family filing in, the boy lifting his 
legs high to show off his new boots, but all the 
others demure, especially the timid, unobservant 
looking little woman in the rear of them. If you 
were the minister's wife that day or the banker's 
daughters you would have got a shock. But she 
bought the christening robe, and when I used to 
ask why, she would beam and look conscious, and 
say she wanted to be extravagant once. And she 
told me, still smiling, that the more a woman was 
given to stitching and making things for herself, 
the greater was her passionate desire now and 
again to rush to the shops and " be foolish." The 
christening robe with its pathetic frills is over half 
a century old now, and has begun to droop a little, 
like a daisy whose time is past, but it is as fondly 
kept together as ever : I saw it in use again only 
the other day. 

My mother lay in bed with the christening robe 
beside her, and I peeped in many times at the 
door and then went to the stair and sat on it and 
sobbed. I know not if it was that first day, or 
many days afterwards, that there came to me my 
sister, the daughter my mother loved the best, yes, 
more I am sure even than she loved me, whose 
great glory she has been since I was six years old. 
This sister, who was then passing out of her teens, 
came to me with a very anxious face and wring- 
ing her hands, and she told me to go ben to my 

231 



MARGARET OGILVY 

mother and say to her that she still had another 
boy. I went ben excitedly, but the room was 
dark, and when I heard the door shut and no 
sound come from the bed I was afraid, and I stood 
still. I suppose I was breathing hard, or perhaps 
I was crying, for after a time I heard a listless 
voice that had never been listless before say, " Is 
that you % " I think the tone hurt me, for I made 
no answer, and then the voice said more anxiously, 
" Is that you ? " again. I thought it was the dead 
boy she was speaking to, and I said in a little 
lonely voice, " No, it's no him, it's just me." Then 
I heard a cry, and my mother turned in bed, and 
though it was dark I knew that she was holding 
out her arms. 

After that I sat a great deal in her bed trying to 
make her forget him, which was my crafty way 
of playing physician, and if I saw any one out of 
doors do something that made the others laugh I 
immediately hastened to that dark room and did 
it before her. I suppose I was an odd little figure; 
I have been told that my anxiety to brighten her 
gave my face a strained look and put a tremor 
into the joke (I would stand on my head in the 
bed, my feet against the wall, and then cry ex- 
citedly, " Are you laughing, mother? ") — and per- 
haps what made her laugh was something I was 
unconscious of, but she did laugh suddenly now 
and then, whereupon I screamed exultantly to 

232 



HER SOFT FACE 

that dear sister, who was ever in waiting, to come 
and see the sight, but by the time she came the 
soft face was wet again. Thus I was deprived 
of some of my glory, and I remember once only 
making her laugh before witnesses. I kept a rec- 
ord of her laughs on a piece of paper, a stroke for 
each, and it was my custom to show this proudly 
to the doctor every morning. There were five 
strokes the first time I slipped it into his hand, 
and when their meaning was explained to him, he 
laughed so boisterously that I cried, " I wish that 
was one of hers ! " Then he was sympathetic, and 
asked me if my mother had seen the paper yet, 
and when I shook my head he said that if I showed 
it to her now and told her that these were her five 
laughs he thought I might win another. I had 
less confidence, but he was the mysterious man 
whom you ran for in the dead of night (you flung 
sand at his window to waken him, and if it was 
only toothache he extracted the tooth through the 
open window, but when it was something sterner 
he was with you in the dark square at once, like 
a man who slept in his topcoat), so I did as he 
bade me, and not only did she laugh then but 
again when I put the laugh down, so that though 
it was really one laugh with a tear in the middle 
I counted it as two. 

It was doubtless that same sister who told me 
not to sulk when my mother lay thinking of him, 

2 33 



MARGARET OGILVY 

but to try instead to get her to talk about him. 1 
did not see how this could make her the merry 
mother she used to be, but I was told that if I 
could not do it nobody could, and this made me 
eager to begin. At first, they say, I was often 
jealous, stopping her fond memories with the cry, 
" Do you mind nothing about me ? " but that did 
not last ; its place was taken by an intense desire 
(again, I think, my sister must have breathed it 
into life) to become so like him that even my 
mother should not see the difference, and many 
and artful were the questions I put to that end. 
Then I practised in secret, but after a whole week 
had passed I was still rather like myself. He had 
such a cheery way of whistling, she had told me, 
it had always brightened her at her work to hear 
him whistling, and when he whistled he stood 
with his legs apart, and his hands in the pockets 
of his knickerbockers. I decided to trust to this, 
so one day after I had learned his whistle (every 
boy of enterprise invents a whistle of his own) 
from boys who had been his comrades, I secretly 
put on a suit of his clothes, dark grey they were, 
with little spots, and they fitted me many years 
afterwards, and thus disguised I slipped, unknown 
to the others, into my mother's room. Quaking, 
I doubt not, yet so pleased, I stood still until she 
saw me, and then — how it must have hurt her ! 
" Listen ! " I cried in a glow of triumph, and I 

2 34 



HER SOFT FACE 

stretched my legs wide apart and plunged my 
hands into the pockets of my knickerbockers, 
and began to whistle. 

She lived twenty-nine years after his death — 
such active years, until toward the end, that you 
never knew where she was unless you took hold of 
her — and though she was frail henceforth and ever 
growing frailer, her housekeeping again became 
famous, so that brides called as a matter of course 
to watch her ca'ming and sanding and stitching : 
there are old people still, one or two, to tell with 
wonder in their eyes how she could bake twenty- 
four bannocks in the hour, and not a chip in one 
of them. And how many she gave away, how 
much she gave away of all she had, and what 
pretty ways she had of giving it ! Her face beamed 
and rippled with mirth as before, and her laugh, 
that I had tried so hard to force, came running 
home again. I have heard no such laugh as hers 
save from merry children ; the laughter of most 
of us ages, and wears out with the body, but hers 
remained gleeful to the last, as if it were born 
afresh every morning. There was always some- 
thing of the child in her, and her laugh was its 
voice, as eloquent of the past to me as was the 
christening robe to her. But I had not made her 
forget the bit of her that was dead ; in those nine 
and twenty years he was not removed one day 
farther from her. Many a time she fell asleep 

*35 



MARGARET OGILVY 

speaking to him, and even while she slept her lip? 
moved and she smiled as if he had come back tc 
her, and when she woke he might vanish so sud- 
denly that she started up bewildered and looked 
about her, and then said slowly, "My David's 
dead!" or perhaps he remained long enough 
to whisper why he must leave her now, and 
then she lay silent with filmy eyes. When ] 
became a man and he was still a boy of thirteen. 
I wrote a little paper called " Dead this Twent) 
Years," which was about a similar tragedy in an- 
other woman's life, and it is the only thing I have 
written that she never spoke about, not even tc 
that daughter she loved the best. No one evei 
spoke of it to her, or asked her if she had read it I 
one does not ask a mother if she knows that there 
is a little coffin in the house. She read many 
times the book in which it is printed, but when 
she came to that chapter she would put her handy 
to her heart or even over her ears. 



236 



CHAPTER II 

WHAT SHE HAD BEEN 

What she had been, what I should be, these were 
the two great subjects between us in my boyhood, 
and while we discussed the one we were deciding 
the other, though neither of us knew it. 

Before I reached my tenth year a giant entered 
my native place in the night, and we woke to 
find him in possession. He transformed it into a 
new town at a rate with which we boys only could 
keep up, for as fast as he built dams we made 
rafts to sail in them; he knocked down houses, 
and there we were crying, " Pilly ! " among the 
ruins; he dug trenches, and we jumped them; we 
had to be dragged by the legs from beneath his 
engines; he sunk wells, and in we went. But 
though there were never circumstances to which 
boys could not adapt themselves in half an hour, 
older folk are slower in the uptake, and I am sure 
they stood and gaped at the changes so suddenly 
being worked in our midst, and scarce knew their 
way home now in the dark. Where had been 
formerly but the click of the shuttle was soon the 

2 37 



MARGARET OGILVY 

roar of " power," hand-looms were pushed into a 
corner as a room is cleared for a dance, every 
morning at half-past five the town was awakened 
with a yell, and from a chimney-stalk that rose 
high into our caller air the conqueror waved for 
evermore his flag of smoke. Another era had 
dawned, new customs, new fashions sprang into 
life, all as lusty as if they had been born at twenty- 
one; as quickly as two people may exchange 
seats, the daughter, till now but a knitter of stock- 
ings, became the breadwinner, he who had been 
the breadwinner sat down to the knitting of stock- 
ings ; what had been yesterday a nest of weavers 
was to-day a town of girls. 

I am not of those who would fling stones at 
the change; it is something, surely, that backs 
are no longer prematurely bent; you may no 
more look through dim panes of glass at the aged 
poor weaving tremulously for their little bit of 
ground in the cemetery. Rather are their work- 
ing years too few now, not because they will it so, 
but because it is with youth that the power-looms 
must be fed. Well, this teaches them to make 
provision, and they have the means as they never 
had before. Not in batches are boys now sent to 
college, the half-dozen a year have dwindled to 
one, doubtless because in these days they can 
begin to draw wages as they step out of their four- 
teenth year. Here assuredly there is loss, but all 

238 



WHAT SHE HAD BEEN 

the losses would be but a pebble in a sea of gain 
were it not for this, that with so many of the 
family, young mothers among them, working in 
the factories, home life is not so beautiful as it 
was. So much of what is great in Scotland has 
sprung from the closeness of the family ties ; it is 
there I sometimes fear that my country is being 
struck. That we are all being reduced to one 
dead level, that "character " abounds no more and 
life itself is less interesting, such things I have 
read, but I do not believe them. I have even 
seen them given as my reason for writing of a past 
time, and in that at least there is no truth. In our 
little town, which is a sample of many, life is as 
interesting, as pathetic, as joyous as ever it was; 
no group of weavers was better to look at or think 
about than the rivulet of winsome girls that over- 
runs our streets every time the sluice is raised, the 
comedy of summer evenings and winter firesides 
is played with the old zest, and every window- 
blind is the curtain of a romance. Once the lights 
of a little town are lit, who could ever hope to tell 
all its story, or the story of a single wynd in it ? 
And who looking at lighted windows needs to 
turn to books ? The reason my books deal with 
the past instead of with the life I myself have 
known is simply this, that I soon grow tired of 
writing tales unless I can see a little girl, of whom 
my mother has told me, wandering confidently 

2 39 



MARGARET OGILVY 

through the pages. Such a grip has her memory 
of her girlhood had upon me since I was a boy 
of six. 

Those innumerable talks with her made her 
youth as vivid to me as my own, and so much 
more quaint, for, to a child, the oddest of things, 
and the most richly coloured picture-book, is that 
his mother was once a child also, and the contrast 
between what she is and what she was is perhaps 
the source of all humour. My mother's father, 
the one hero of her life, died nine years before I 
was born, and I remember this with bewilderment, 
so familiarly does the weather-beaten mason's fig- 
ure rise before me from the old chair on which I 
was nursed and now write my books. On the 
surface he is as hard as the stone on which he 
chiselled, and his face is dyed red by its dust, he 
is rounded in the shoulders and a " hoast " hunts 
him ever; sooner or later that cough must carry 
him off, but until then it shall not keep him from 
the quarry, nor shall his chapped hands, as long as 
they can grasp the mell. It is a night of rain or 
snow, and my mother, the little girl in a pinafore 
who is already his housekeeper, has been many 
times to the door to look for him. At last he 
draws nigh, hoasting. Or I see him setting off to 
church, for he was a great " stoop " of the Auld 
Licht kirk, and his mouth is very firm now as if 
there were a case of discipline to face, but on his 

240 



WHAT SHE HAD BEEN 

way home he is bowed with pity. Perhaps his 
little daughter who saw him so stern an hour ago 
does not understand why he wrestles so long in 
prayer to-night, or why when he rises from his 
knees he presses her to him with unwonted ten- 
derness. Or he is in this chair repeating to her 
his favourite poem, " The Cameronian's Dream," 
and at the first lines so solemnly uttered, 

In a dream of the night I was wafted away, 

she screams with excitement, just as I screamed 
long afterwards when she repeated them in his 
voice to me. Or I watch, as from a window, 
while she sets off through the long parks to the 
distant place where he is at work, in her hand a 
flaggon which contains his dinner. She is singing 
to herself and gleefully swinging the flaggon, she 
jumps the burn and proudly measures the jump 
with her eye, but she never dallies unless she 
meets a baby, for she was so fond of babies that 
she must hug each one she met, but while she 
hugged them she also noted how their robes were 
cut, and afterwards made paper patterns, which 
she concealed jealously, and in the fullness of time 
her first robe for her eldest born was fashioned 
from one of these patterns, made when she was in 
her twelfth year. 

She was eight when her mother's death made 
her mistress of the house and mother to her little 

241 



MARGARET OGILVY 

brother, and from that time she scrubbed and 
mended and baked and sewed, and argued with 
the flesher about the quarter-pound of beef and 
penny bone which provided dinner for two days 
(but if you think that this was poverty you don't 
know the meaning of the word), and she carried 
the water from the pump, and had her washing 
days and her ironings and a stocking always on 
the wire for odd moments, and gossiped like a 
matron with the other women, and humoured the 
men with a tolerant smile — all these things she 
did as a matter of course, leaping joyful from bed 
in the morning because there was so much to do, 
doing it as thoroughly and sedately as if the brides 
were already due for a lesson, and then rushing 
out in a fit of childishness to play dumps or pa- 
laulays with others of her age. I see her frocks 
lengthening, though they were never very short, 
and the games given reluctantly up. The horror 
of my boyhood was that I knew a time would 
come when I also must give up the games, and 
how it was to be done I saw not (this agony still 
returns to me in dreams, when I catch myself 
playing marbles, and look on with cold dis- 
pleasure) ; I felt that I must continue playing in 
secret, and I took this shadow to her, when she 
told me her own experience, which convinced us 
both that we were very like each other inside. 
She had discovered that work is the best fun after 

242 



WHAT SHE HAD BEEN 

all, and I learned it in time, but have my lapses, 
and so had she. 

I know what was her favourite costume when 
she was at the age that they make heroines of: it 
was a pale blue with a pale blue bonnet, the white 
ribbons of which tied aggravatingly beneath the 
chin, and when questioned about this garb she 
never admitted that she looked pretty in it, but she 
did say, with blushes too, that blue was her colour, 
and then she might smile, as at some memory, 
and begin to tell us about a man who — but it 
ended there with another smile which was longer 
in departing. She never said, indeed she denied 
strenuously, that she had led the men a dance, 
but again the smile returned, and came between 
us and full belief Yes, she had her little vanities; 
when she got the Mizpah ring she did carry that 
finger in such a way that the most reluctant must 
see. She was very particular about her gloves, 
and hid her boots so that no other should put 
them on, and then she forgot their hiding-place, 
and had suspicions of the one who found them. 
A good way of enraging her was to say that her 
last year's bonnet would do for this year without 
alteration, or that it would defy the face of clay to 
count the number of her shawls. In one of my 
books there is a mother who is setting off with her 
son for the town to which he had been called as 
minister, and she pauses on the threshold to ask 

2 43 



MARGARET OGILVY 

him anxiously if he thinks her bonnet " sets " her. 
A reviewer said she acted thus, not because she 
cared how she looked, but for the sake of her son. 
This, I remember, amused my mother very much. 
I have seen many weary on-dings of snow, but 
the one I seem to recollect best occurred nearly 
twenty years before I was born. It was at the 
time of my mother's marriage to one who proved 
a most loving as he was always a well-loved hus- 
band, a man I am very proud to be able to call 
my father. I know not for how many days the 
snow had been falling, but a day came when the 
people lost heart and would make no more gullies 
through it, and by next morning to do so was 
impossible, they could not fling the snow high 
enough. Its back was against every door when 
Sunday came, and none ventured out save a val- 
iant few, who buffeted their way into my mothers 
home to discuss her predicament, for unless she 
was " cried " in the church that day she might 
not be married for another week, and how could 
she be cried with the minister a field away and 
the church buried to the waist? For hours 
they talked, and at last some men started for the 
church, which was several hundred yards distant. 
Three of them found a window, and forcing a 
passage through it, cried the pair, and that is how 
it came about that my father and mother were 
married on the first of March. 

244 



WHAT SHE HAD BEEN 

That would be the end, I suppose, if it were a 
story, but to my mother it was only another be- 
ginning, and not the last. I see her bending over 
the cradle of her first-born, college for him already 
in her eye (and my father not less ambitious), and 
anon it is a girl who is in the cradle, and then an- 
other girl — already a tragic figure to those who 
know the end. I wonder if any instinct told my 
mother that the great day of her life was when she 
bore this child ; what I am sure of is that from the 
first the child followed her with the most wistful 
eyes and saw how she needed help and longed to 
rise and give it. For of physical strength my 
mother had never very much; it was her spirit 
that got through the work, and in those days she 
was often so ill that the sand rained on the doctor's 
window, and men ran to and fro with leeches, and 
" she is in life, we can say no more " was the in- 
formation for those who came knocking at the 
door. " I am sorrow to say," her father writes in 
an old letter now before me, " that Margaret is in 
a state that she was never so bad before in this 
world. Till Wednesday night she was in as poor 
a condition as you could think of to be alive. 
However, after bleeding, leeching, etc., the Dr. 
says this morning that he is better hoped now, but 
at present we can say no more but only she is 
alive and in the hands of Him in whose hands all 
our lives are. I can give you no adequate view 

245 



MARGARET OGILVY 

of what my feelings are, indeed they are a burden 
too heavy for me and I cannot describe them. I 
look on my right and left hand 2nd find no com- 
fort, and if it were not for the rock that is higher 
than I my spirit would utterly fail, but blessed be 
His name who can comfort those that are cast 
down. O for more faith in His supporting grace 
in this hour of trial." 

Then she is " on the mend," she may " thole 
thro'" if they take great care of her, "which we 
will be forward to do." The fourth child dies 
when but a few weeks old, and the next at two 
years. She was her grandfather's companion, and 
thus he wrote of her death, this stern, self-educated 
Auld Licht with the chapped hands : 

" 1 hope you received my last in which I spoke 
of Dear little Lydia being unwell. Now with 
deep sorrow I must tell you that yesterday I as- 
sisted in laying her dear remains in the lonely 
grave. She died at 7 o'clock on Wednesday even- 
ing, I suppose by the time you had got the letter. 
The Dr. did not think it was croup till late on 
Tuesday night, and all that Medical aid could 
prescribe was done, but the Dr. had no hope after 
he saw that the croup was confirmed, and hard in- 
deed would the heart have been that would not 
have melted at seeing what the dear little creature 
suffered all Wednesday until the feeble frame was 
quite worn out. She was quite sensible till within 

246 



WHAT SHE HAD BEEN 

2 hours of her death, and then she sunk quite low 
till the vital spark fled, and all medicine that she 
got she took with the greatest readiness, as if ap- 
prehensive they would make her well. I cannot 
well describe my feelings on the occasion. I 
thought that the fountain head of my tears had 
now been dried up, but I have been mistaken, for 
I must confess that the briny rivulets descended 
fast on my furrowed cheeks, she was such a win- 
ning Child, and had such a regard for me and al- 
ways came and told me all her little things, and as 
she was now speaking, some of her little prattle 
was very taking, and the lively images of these 
things intrude themselves more into my mind than 
they should do, but there is allowance for moder- 
ate grief on such occasions. But when I am tell- 
ing you of my own grief and sorrow, I know not 
what to say of the bereaved Mother, she hath not 
met with anything in this world before that hath 
gone so near the quick with her. She had no 
handling of the last one as she was not able at the 
time, for she only had her once in her arms, and 
her affections had not time to be so fairly entwined 
around her. 1 am much afraid that she will not 
soon if ever get over this trial. Although she was 
weakly before, yet she was pretty well recovered, 
but this hath not only affected her mind but her 
body is so much affected that she is not well able 
to sit so long as her bed is making and hath 

247 



MARGARET OGILVY 

scarcely tasted meat [i. e. food] since Monday 
night, and till some time is elapsed we cannot say 
how she may be. There is none that is not a pa- 
rent themselves that can fully sympathise with one 
in such a state. David is much affected also, but 
it is not so well known on him, and the younger 
branches of the family are affected but it will be 
only momentary. But alas in all this vast ado, 
there is only the sorrow of the world which work- 
eth death, O how gladdening would it be if we 
were in as great bitterness for sin as for the loss of 
a first-born. O how unfitted persons or families is 
for trials who knows not the divine art of casting 
all their cares upon the Lord, and what multitudes 
are there that when earthly comforts is taken away, 
may well say what have I more ? all their delight 
is placed in some one thing or another in the world, 
and who can blame them for unwillingly parting 
with what they esteem their chief good. O that 
we were wise to lay up treasure for the time of 
need, for it is truly a solemn affair to enter the lists 
with the king of terrors. It is strange that the 
living lay the things so little to heart until they 
have to engage in that war where there is no dis- 
charge. O that my head were waters and mine 
eyes a fountain of tears that I might weep day and 
night for my own and others' stupidity in this great 
matter. O for grace to do every day work in its 
proper time and to live above the tempting cheat- 

248 



WHAT SHE HAD BEEN 

ing train of earthly things. The rest of the fam- 
ily are moderately well. I have been for some 
days worse than I have been for 8 months past, 
but I may soon get better, I am in the same way 
I have often been in before, but there is no secur- 
ity for it always being so, for I know that it can- 
not be far from the time when I will be one of 
those that once were. I have no other news to 
send you, and as little heart for them. I hope you 
will take the earliest opportunity of writing that 
you can, and be particular as regards Margaret, 
for she requires consolation." 

He died exactly a week after writing this letter, 
but my mother was to live for another forty-four 
years. And joys of a kind never shared in by 
him were to come to her so abundantly, so long 
drawn out, that, strange as it would have seemed 
to him to know it, her fuller life had scarce yet 
begun. And with the joys were to come their 
sweet, frightened comrades, pain and grief, again 
she was to be touched to the quick, again and 
again to be so ill that " she is in life, we can say 
no more," but still she had attendants very " for- 
ward" to help her, some of them unborn in her 
father's time. 

She told me everything, and so my memories 
of our little red town are coloured by her memo- 
ries. I knew it as it had been for generations, and 
suddenly I saw it change, and the transformation 

249 



MARGARET OGILVY 

could not fail to strike a boy, for these first years 
are the most impressionable (nothing that happens 
after we are twelve matters very much); they are 
also the most vivid years when we look back, and 
more vivid the farther we have to look, until, at 
the end, what lies between bends like a hoop, and 
the extremes meet. But though the new town is 
to me a glass through which I look at the old, the 
people I see passing up and down these wynds, 
sitting, night-capped, on their barrow-shafts, hob- 
bling in their blacks to church on Sunday, are less 
those I saw in my childhood than their fathers and 
mothers who did these things in the same way 
when my mother was young. I cannot picture 
the place without seeing her, as a little girl, come 
to the door of a certain house and beat her biss 
against the gav'le-end, or there is a wedding to- 
night, and the carriage with the white-eared horse 
is sent for a maiden in pale blue, whose bonnet- 
strings tie beneath the chin. 



25O 



CHAPTER III 

WHAT I SHOULD BE 

My mother was a great reader, and with ten min- 
utes to spare before the starch was ready would 
begin the "Decline and Fall" — and finish it, too, 
that winter. Foreign words in the text annoyed 
her and made her bemoan her want of a classical 
education — she had only attended a Dame's school 
during some easy months — but she never passed 
the foreign words by until their meaning was ex- 
plained to her, and when next she and they met it 
was as acquaintances, which I think was clever of 
her. One of her delights was to learn from me 
scraps of Horace, and then bring them into her 
conversation with " colleged men." I have come 
upon her in lonely places, such as the stair-head or 
the east room, muttering these quotations aloud to 
herself, and I well remember how she would say 
to the visitors, " Ay, ay, it's very true, Doctor, but 
as you know, 'Eheu fugaces, Postume, Postume, 
labuntur anni/ " or " Sal, Mr. so and so, my lassie 
is thriving well, but would it no be more to the 
point to say ' O mater, pulchra filia pulchrior ' ? " 

251 



MARGARET OGILVY 

which astounded them very much if she managed 
to reach the end without being flung, but usually 
she had a fit of laughing in the middle, and so 
they found her out. 

Biography and exploration were her favourite 
reading, for choice the biography of men who had 
been good to their mothers, and she liked the ex- 
plorers to be alive so that she could shudder at the 
thought of their venturing forth again, but though 
she expressed a hope that they would have the 
sense to stay at home henceforth, she gleamed with 
admiration when they disappointed her. In later 
days I had a friend who was an African explorer, 
and she was in two minds about him ; he was one 
of the most engrossing of mortals to her, she ad- 
mired him prodigiously, pictured him at the head 
of his caravan, now attacked by savages, now by 
wild beasts, and adored him for the uneasy hours 
he gave her, but she was also afraid that he 
wanted to take me with him, and then she thought 
he should be put down by law. Explorers' mo- 
thers also interested her very much; the books 
might tell her nothing about them, but she could 
create them for herself and wring her hands in 
sympathy with them when they had got no news 
of him for six months. Yet there were times when 
she grudged him to them — as the day when he 
returned victorious. Then what was before hei 
eyes was not the son coming marching home 

252 



WHAT I SHOULD BE 

again, but an old woman peering for him round 
the window curtain and trying not to look up- 
lifted. The newspaper reports would be about 
the son, but my mother's comment was " She 5 s a 
proud woman this night." 

We read many books together when I was a, 
boy, " Robinson Crusoe " being the first (and the 
second), and the "Arabian Nights" should have 
been the next, for we got it out of the library (a 
penny for three days), but on discovering that 
they were nights when we had paid for knights 
we sent that volume packing, and I have curled 
my lips at it ever since. " The Pilgrim's Pro- 
gress " we had in the house (it was as common a 
possession as a dresser-head), and so enamoured 
of it was I that I turned our garden into sloughs 
of Despond, with pea-sticks to represent Christian 
on his travels and a buffet-stool for his burden, but 
when I dragged my mother out to see my handi- 
work she was scared, and I felt for days, with a 
certain elation, that I had been a dark character. 
Besides reading every book we could hire or bor- 
row I also bought one now and again, and while 
buying (it was the occupation of weeks) I read, 
standing at the counter, most of the other books 
in the shop, which is perhaps the most exquisite 
way of reading. And I took in a magazine called 
"Sunshine," the most delicious periodical, I am 
sure, of any day. It cost a halfpenny or a penny 

2 53 



MARGARET OGILVY 

a month, and always, as I fondly remember, had a 
continued tale about the dearest girl, who sold 
water-cress, which is a dainty not grown and I 
suppose never seen in my native town. This ro- 
mantic little creature took such hold of my im- 
agination that I cannot eat water-cress even now 
without emotion. I lay in bed wondering what 
she would be up to in the next number; I have 
lost trout because when they nibbled my mind 
was wandering with her; my early life was em- 
bittered by her not arriving regularly on the 
first of the month. I know not whether it was 
owing to her loitering on the way one month to 
an extent flesh and blood could not bear, or be- 
cause we had exhausted the penny library, but on 
a day I conceived a glorious idea, or it was put 
into my head by my mother, then desirous of 
making progress with her new clouty hearth-rug. 
The notion was nothing short of this, why should 
I not write the tales myself? I did write them — 
in the garret — but they by no means helped her 
to get on with her work, for when I finished a 
chapter I bounded downstairs to read it to her, and 
so short were the chapters, so ready was the pen, 
that I was back with new manuscript before an- 
other clout had been added to the rug. Author- 
ship seemed, like her bannock-baking, to consist 
of running between two points. They were all 
tales of adventure (happiest is he who writes of 

254 



WHAT I SHOULD BE 

adventure), no characters were allowed within if 
I knew their like in the flesh, the scene lay in 
unknown parts, desert islands, enchanted gardens^ 
with knights (none of your nights) on black 
chargers, and round the first corner a lady sell- 
ing water-cress. 

At twelve or thereabout I put the literary call- 
ing to bed for a time, having gone to a school 
where cricket and football were more esteemed, 
but during the year before I went to the univer- 
sity, it woke up and I wrote great part of a three- 
volume novel. The publisher replied that the 
sum for which he would print it was a hundred 
and — however, that was not the important point 
(I had sixpence) : where he stabbed us both was 
in writing that he considered me a " clever lady." 
I replied stiffly that I was a gentleman, and since 
then I have kept that manuscript concealed. I 
looked through it lately, and, oh, but it is dull. 
I defy any one to read it. 

The malignancy of publishers, however, could 
not turn me back. From the day on which I first 
tasted blood in the garret my mind was made up ; 
there could be no hum-dreadful-drum profession 
for me; literature was my game. It was not 
highly thought of by those who wished me well. 
I remember being asked by two maiden ladies, 
about the time I left the university, what I was to 
be, and when I replied brazenly, "An author," 

255 



MARGARET OGILVY 

they flung up their hands, and one exclaimed re* 
proachfully, "And you an M. A.!" My mother's 
views at first were not dissimilar; for long she 
took mine jestingly as something I would grow 
out of, and afterwards they hurt her so that I tried 
to give them up. To be a minister — that she 
thought was among the fairest prospects, but she 
was a very ambitious woman, and sometimes she 
would add, half scared at her appetite, that there 
were ministers who had become professors, "but 
it was not canny to think of such things." 

I had one person only on my side, an old tailor, 
one of the fullest men I have known, and quite 
the best talker. He was a bachelor (he told me 
all that is to be known about woman), a lean man, 
pallid of face, his legs drawn up when he walked, 
as if he was ever carrying something in his lap ; 
his walks were of the shortest, from the tea-pot on 
the hob to the board on which he stitched, from 
the board to the hob, and so to bed. He might 
have gone out had the idea struck him, but in the 
years I knew him, the last of his brave life, I think 
he was only in the open twice, when he " flitted " 
— changed his room for another hard by. I did 
not see him make these journeys, but I seem to 
see him now, and he is somewhat dizzy in the odd 
atmosphere ; in one hand he carries a box-iron, he 
raises the other, wondering what this is on his 
head — it is a hat; a faint smell of singed cloth goes 

256 



WHAT I SHOULD BE 

by with him. This man had heard of my set of 
photographs of the poets and asked for a sight of 
them, which led to our first meeting. I remember 
how he spread them out on his board, and after 
looking long at them, turned his ga^e on me and 
said solemnly, 

What can I do to be for ever known, 
And make the age to come my own ? 

These lines of Cowley were new to me, but the 
sentiment was not new, and I marvelled how the 
old tailor could see through me so well. So it 
was strange to me to discover presently that he 
had not been thinking of me at all, but of his own 
young days, when that couplet sang in his head, 
and he, too, had thirsted to set off for Grub Street, 
but was afraid, and while he hesitated old age 
came, and then Death, and found him grasping a 
Lox-iron. 

I hurried home with the mouthful, but neigh- 
bours had dropped in, and this was for her ears 
only, so I drew her to the stair, and said imperi- 
ously, 

What can I do to be for ever known, 
And make the age to come my own ? 

It was an odd request for which to draw her from 
a tea-table, and she must have been surprised, but 
I think she did not laugh, and in after years she 

2?7 



MARGARET OGILVY 

would repeat the lines fondly, with a flush on her 
soft face. " That is the kind you would like to 
be yourself!" we would say in jest to her, and she 
would reply almost passionately, " No, but I would 
be windy of being his mother." It is possible that 
she could have been his mother had that other son 
lived, he might have managed it from sheer love 
of her, but for my part I can smile at one of those 
two figures on the stair now, having long given up 
the dream of being for ever known, and seeing 
myself more akin to my friend, the tailor ; for as 
he was found at the end on his board, so I hope 
shall I be found at my hand-loom, doing honestly 
the work that suits me best. Who shall know so 
well as I that it is but a hand-loom compared to 
the great guns that reverberate through the age to 
come ? But she who stood with me on the stair 
that day was a very simple woman, accustomed all 
her life to making the most of small things, and I 
weaved sufficiently well to please her, which has 
been my only steadfast ambition since I was a little 
boy. 

Not less than mine became her desire that I 
should have my way — but, ah, the iron seats in 
that Park of horrible repute, and that bare room 
at the top of many flights of stairs ! While I was 
away at college she drained all available libraries 
for books about those who go to London to live 
by the pen, and they all told the same shuddering 

258 



WHAT I SHOULD BE 

tale. London, which she never saw, was to her a 
monster that licked up country youths as they 
stepped from the train ; there were the garrets in 
which they sat abject, and the park seats where 
they passed the night. Those park seats were the 
monster's glaring eyes to her, and as I go by them 
now she is nearer to me than when I am in any 
other part of London. I daresay that when night 
comes, this Hyde Park which is so gay by day is 
haunted by the ghosts of many mothers, who run, 
wild-eyed, from seat to seat, looking for their sons. 
But if we could dodge those dreary seats she 
longed to see me try my luck, and I sought to ex- 
clude them from the picture by drawing maps of 
London with Hyde Park left out. London was 
as strange to me as to her, but long before I was 
shot upon it I knew it by maps, and drew them 
more accurately than I could draw them now. 
Many a time she and I took our jaunt together 
through the map, and were most gleeful, popping 
into telegraph offices to wire my father and sister 
that we should not be home till late, winking to 
my books in lordly shop-windows, lunching at 
restaurants (and remembering not to call it dinner), 
saying, "How do? " to Mr. Alfred Tennyson when 
we passed him in Regent Street, calling at pub- 
lishers' offices for a cheque, when " Will you take 
care of it, or shall I ? " I asked gaily, and she 
would be certain to reply, " I'm thinking we'd bet- 

259 



MARGARET OGILVY 

ter take it to the bank and get the money," for she 
always felt surer of money than of cheques, so to 
the bank we went (" Two tens, and the rest in 
gold"), and thence straightway (by cab) to the 
place where you buy sealskin coats for middling 
old ladies. But ere the laugh was done the park 
would come through the map like a blot. 

" If you could only be sure of as much as would 
keep body and soul together," my mother would 
say with a sigh. 

"With something over, mother, to send to 
you." 

" You couldna expect that at the start." 

The wench I should have been courting now 
was journalism, that grisette of literature who has 
a smile and a hand for all beginners, welcoming 
them at the threshold, teaching them so much 
that is worth knowing, introducing them to the 
other lady whom they have worshipped from afar, 
showing them even how to woo her, and then 
bidding them a bright God-speed — he were an 
ingrate who, having had her joyous companion- 
ship, no longer flings her a kiss as they pass. But 
though she bears no ill-will when she is jilted, you 
must serve faithfully while you are hers, and you 
must seek her out and make much of her, and, 
until you can rely on her good-nature (note this), 
not a word about the other lady. When at last 
die took me in I grew so fond of her that I called 

260 



WHAT I SHOULD BE 

her by the other's name, and even now I think at 
times that there was more fun in the little sister, 
but I began by wooing her with contributions 
that were all misfits. In an old book I find col- 
umns of notes about works projected at this time, 
nearly all to consist of essays on deeply uninter- 
esting subjects; the lightest was to be a volume 
on the older satirists, beginning with Skelton and 
Tom Nash — the half of that manuscript still lies 
in a dusty chest — the only story was about Mary 
Queen of Scots, who was also the subject of many 
unwritten papers. Queen Mary seems to have 
been luring me to my undoing ever since I saw 
Holyrood, and I have a horrid fear that I may 
write that novel yet. That anything could be 
written about my native place never struck me. 
We had read somewhere that a novelist is better 
equipped than most of his trade if he knows him- 
self and one woman, and my mother said, " You 
know yourself for everybody must know himself" 
(there never was a woman who knew less about 
herself than she), and she would add dolefully, 
"But I doubt I'm the only woman you know 
well." 

" Then I must make you my heroine/' I said 
lightly. 

" A g e y auld-farrant-like heroine ! " she said, and 
we both laughed at the notion — so little did we 
read the future. 

261 



MARGARET OGILVY 

Thus it is obvious what were my qualifications 
when I was rashly engaged as a leader-writer (it 
was my sister who saw the advertisement) on an 
English provincial paper. At the moment I was 
as uplifted as the others, for the chance had come 
at last, with what we all regarded as a prodigious 
salary, but I was wanted in the beginning of the 
week, and it suddenly struck me that the leaders 
were the one thing I had always skipped. Lead- 
ers ! How were they written ? what were they 
about? My mother was already sitting trium- 
phant among my socks, and I durst not let her see 
me quaking. I retired to ponder, and presently 
she came to me with the daily paper. Which 
were the leaders? she wanted to know, so evi- 
dently I could get no help from her. Had she 
any more newspapers? I asked, and after rum- 
maging she produced a few with which her boxes 
had been lined. Others, very dusty, came from 
beneath carpets, and lastly a sooty bundle was 
dragged down the chimney. Surrounded by these, 
I sat down and studied how to become a journalist. 



262 



CHAPTER IV 

AN EDITOR 

A devout lady, to whom some friend had presented 
one of my books, used to say when asked how she 
was getting on with it, "Sal, it's dreary, weary, uphill 
w T ork, but I've wrastled through with tougher jobs 
in my time, and, please God, I'll wrastle through 
with this one." It was in this spirit, I fear, though 
she never told me so, that my mother wrestled for 
the next year or more with my leaders, and indeed 
I was always genuinely sorry for the people I saw 
reading them. In my spare hours I was trying 
journalism of another kind and sending it to Lon- 
don, but nearly eighteen months elapsed before 
there came to me, as unlooked for as a telegram, 
the thought that there was something quaint about 
my native place. A boy who found that a knife 
had been put into his pocket in the night could 
not have been more surprised. A few days after- 
wards I sent my mother a London evening paper 
with an article entitled "An Auld Licht Commu- 
nity," and they told me that when she saw the 
heading she laughed, because there was something 
droll to her in the sight of the words Auld Licht 

263 



MARGARET OGILVY 

in print. For her, as for me, that newspaper was 
soon to have the face of a friend. To this day I 
never pass its placards in the street without shak- 
ing it by the hand, and she used to sew its pages 
together as lovingly as though they were a child's 
frock ; but let the truth be told, when she read that 
first article she became alarmed, and fearing the 
talk of the town, hid the paper from all eyes. For 
some time afterwards, while I proudly pictured 
her showing this and similar articles to all who 
felt an interest in me, she was really concealing 
them fearfully in a bandbox on the garret stair. 
And she wanted to know by return of post whether 
I was paid for these articles just as I was paid for 
real articles ; when she heard that I was paid bet- 
ter, she laughed again and had them out of the 
bandbox for re-reading, and it cannot be denied 
that she thought the London editor a fine fellow 
but slightly soft. 

When I sent off that first sketch I thought I 
had exhausted the subject, but our editor wrote 
that he would like something more of the same, 
so I sent him a marriage, and he took it, and then 
I tried him with a funeral, and he took it, and 
really it began to look as if we had him. Now 
my mother might have been discovered, in answer 
to certain excited letters, flinging the bundle of 
undarned socks from her lap, and " going in for 
literature;" she was racking her brains, by request, 

264 



AN EDITOR 

for memories I might convert into articles, and 
they came to me in letters which she dictated to 
my sisters. How well I could hear her saying 
between the lines : " But the editor-man will 

never stand that, it's perfect blethers " " By 

this post it must go, I tell you ; we must take the 
editor when he's hungry — we canna be blamed 
for it, can we ? he prints them of his free will, so 

the wite is his" "But I'm near terrified. — If 

London folk reads them we're done for." And I 
was sounded as to the advisability of sending him 
a present of a lippie of short-bread, which was to 
be her crafty way of getting round him. By this 
time, though my mother and I were hundreds of 
miles apart, you may picture us waving our hands 
to each other across country, and shouting " Hur- 
rah ! " You may also picture the editor in his 
office thinking he was behaving like a shrewd 
man of business, and unconscious that up in the 
north there was an elderly lady chuckling so much 
at him that she could scarcely scrape the potatoes. 

I was now able to see my mother again, and 
the park seats no longer loomed so prominent in 
our map of London. Still, there they were, and 
it was with an effort that she summoned up cou- 
rage to let me go. She feared changes, and who 
could tell that the editor would continue to be 
kind ? Perhaps when he saw me — 

She seemed to be very much afraid of his seeing 
265 



MARGARET OGILVY 

me, and this, I would point out, was a reflection 
en my appearance or my manner. 

No, what she meant was that I looked so young, 
and — and that would take him aback, for had I 
not written as an aged man ? 

" But he knows my age, mother." 

" I'm glad of that, but maybe he wouldna like 
you when he saw you." 

" Oh, it is my manner, then ! " 

"I dinna say that, but " 

Here my sister would break in: "The short 
and the long of it is juSt this, she thinks nobody 
has such manners as herself. Can you deny it, 
you vain woman?" 

My mother would deny it vigorously. 

" You stand there," my sister would say with af- 
fected scorn, "and tell me you don't think you could 
get the better of that man quicker than any of us?" 

" Sal, I'm thinking I could manage him," says 
my mother, with a chuckle. 

" How would you set about it ? " 

Then my mother would begin to laugh. "I 
would find out first if he had a family, and then I 
would say they were the finest family in London." 

"Yes, that is just what you would do, you cun 
ning woman ! But if he has no family ? " 

'* 1 would say what great men editors are ! " 

" He would see through you." 

"Not he!" 

266 



AN EDITOR 

"You don't understand that what imposes on 
common folk would never hoodwink an editor." 

" That's where you are wrong. Gentle or sim- 
ple, stupid or clever, the men are all alike in the 
hands of a woman that flatters them." 

" Ah, I'm sure there are better ways of getting 
round an editor than that." 

" I daresay there are," my mother would say 
with conviction, " but if you try that plan you 
will never need to try another." 

"How artful you are, mother — you with your 
soft face ! Do you not think shame ? " 

" Pooh ! " says my mother brazenly. 

" I can see the reason why you are so popular 
with men." 

" Ay, you can see it, but they never will." 

" Well, how would you dress yourself if you 
were going to that editor's office ? " 

" Of course I would wear my silk and my Sab- 
bath bonnet." 

" It is you who are shortsighted now, mother. 
I tell you, you would manage him better if you 
just put on your old grey shawl and one of your 
bonny white mutches, and went in half smiling 
and half timid and said, ' I am the mother of him 
that writes about the Auld Lichts, and I want you 
to promise that he will never have to sleep in the 
open air.' " 

But my mother would shake her head at this, 
267 



MARGARET OGILVY 

and reply almost hotly, " I tell you if I ever go 
into that man's office, I go in silk." 

I wrote and asked the editor if I should come 
to London, and he said No, so I went, laden with 
charges from my mother to walk in the middle of 
the street (they jump out on you as you are turn- 
ing a corner), never to venture forth after sunset, 
and always to lock up everything (I who could 
never lock up anything, except my heart in com- 
pany). Thanks to this editor, for the others would 
have nothing to say to me though I battered on 
all their doors, she was soon able to sleep at nights 
without the dread that I should -be waking pres- 
ently with the iron-work of certain seats figured 
on my person, and what relieved her very much 
was that I had begun to write as if Auld Lichts 
were not the only people I knew of. So long as 
I confined myself to them she had a haunting fear 
that, even though the editor remained blind to his 
best interests, something would one day go crack 
within me (as the mainspring of a watch breaks) 
and my pen refuse to write for evermore. "Ay, 
I like the article brawly," she would say timidly, 
"but I'm doubting it's the last — I always have 
a sort of terror the new one may be the last," and 
it many days elapsed before the arrival of another 
article her face would say mournfully, " The blow 
has fallen — he can think of nothing more to write 
about." If I ever shared her fears I never told her 

268 



AN EDITOR 

so, and the articles that were not Scotch grew in 
number until there were hundreds of them, all 
carefully preserved by her: they were the only 
thing in the house that, having served one pur- 
pose, she did not convert into something else, yet 
they could give her uneasy moments. This was 
because I nearly always assumed a character when 
I wrote ; I must be a country squire, or an under- 
graduate, or a butler, or a member of the House 
of Lords, or a dowager, or a lady called Sweet 
Seventeen, or an engineer in India, else was my 
pen clogged; and though this gave my mother 
certain fearful joys, causing her to laugh unex- 
pectedly (so far as my articles were concerned she 
nearly always laughed in the wrong place), it also 
scared her. Much to her amusement, the editor 
continued to prefer the Auld Licht papers, how- 
ever, as was proved (to those who knew him) by 
his way of thinking that the others would pass as 
they were, while he sent these back and asked me 
to make them better. Here again she came to 
my aid. I had said that the row of stockings were 
hung on a string by the fire, which was a recollec- 
tion of my own, but she could tell me whether 
they were hung upside down. She became quite 
skilful at sending or giving me (for now I could 
be with her half the year) the right details, but 
still she smiled at the editor, and in her gay moods 
she would say, " I was fifteen when I got my first 

269 



MARGARET OGILVY 

pair of elastic-sided boots. Tell him my charge 
for this important news is two pounds ten." 

" Ay, but though we're doing well, it's no the 
same as if they were a book with your name on 
it." So the ambitious woman would say with a 
sigh, and I did my best to turn the Auld Licht 
sketches into a book with my name on it. Then 
perhaps we understood most fully how good a 
friend our editor had been, for just as I had been 
able to find no well-known magazine — and I 
think I tried all — which would print any article 
or story about the poor of my native land, so now 
the publishers, Scotch and English, refused to ac- 
cept the book as a gift. I was willing to present 
it to them, but they would have it in no guise ; 
there seemed to be a blight on everything that 
was Scotch. I daresay we sighed, but never were 
collaborators more prepared for rejection, and 
though my mother might look wistfully at the 
scorned manuscript at times and murmur, " You 
poor cold little crittur shut away in a drawer, are 
you dead or just sleeping'?" she had still her 
editor to say grace over. And at last publishers, 
sufficiently daring and far more than sufficiently 
generous, were found for us by a dear friend, who 
made one woman very " uplifted." He also was 
an editor, and had as large a part in making me a 
writer of books as the other in determining what 
the books should be about. 

270 



AN EDITOR 

Now that I was an author, I must get into a 
club. But you should have heard my mother on 
clubs ! She knew of none save those to which 
you subscribe a pittance weekly in anticipation of 
rainy days, and the London clubs were her scorn. 
Often I heard her on them — she raised her voice 
to make me hear, whichever room I might be in, 
and it was when she was sarcastic that I skulked 
the most : " Thirty pounds is what he will have to 
pay the first year, and ten pounds a year after that. 
You think it's a lot o' siller? Oh, no, you're 
mista'en — it's nothing ava. For the third part of 
thirty pounds you could rent a four-roomed house, 
but what is a four-roomed house, what is thirty 
pounds, compared to the glory of being a member 
of a club ! Where does the glory come in ? Sal, 
you needna ask me, I'm just a doited auld stock 
that never set foot in a club, so it's little I ken 
about glory. But I may tell you if you bide in 
London and canna become member of a club, 
the best you can do is to tie a rope round your 
neck and slip out of the world. What use are 
they? Oh, they're terrible useful. You see, it 
doesna do for a man in London to eat his dinner 
in his lodgings. Other men shake their heads at 
him. He maun away to his club if he is to be 
respected. Does he get good dinners at the club ? 
Oh, they cow! You get no common beef at 
clubs; there is a manzy of different things al) 

271 



MARGARET OGILVY 

sauced up to be unlike themsels. Even the pota- 
toes daurna look like potatoes. If the food in a 
club looks like what it is, the members run about, 
flinging up their hands and crying, ' Woe is me!' 
Then this is another thing, you get your letters 
sent to the club instead of to your lodgings. You 
see, you would get them sooner at your lodgings, 
and you may have to trudge weary miles to the 
club for them ; but that's a great advantage, and 
cheap at thirty pounds, is it no? I wonder they 
can do it at the price." 

My wisest policy was to remain downstairs 
when these withering blasts were blowing, but 
probably I went up in self-defence. 

" I never saw you so pugnacious before, mother." 

" Oh," she would reply promptly, " you canna 
expect me to be sharp in the uptake when I am 
no a member of a club." 

" But the difficulty is in becoming a member. 
They are very particular about whom they elect, 
and I daresay I shall not get in." 

" Well, I'm but a poor crittur (not being mem- 
ber of a club), but I think I can tell you to make 
your mind easy on that head. You'll get in, Pse 
uphaud — and your thirty pounds will get in, too." 

" If I get in, it will be because the editor is sup* 
porting me." 

** It's the first ill thing I ever heard of him." 
272 



AN EDITOR 

" You don't think he is to get any of the thirty 
pounds, do you ? " 

" 'Deed if I did I should be better pleased, for 
he has been a good friend to us ; but what mad- 
dens me is that every penny of it should go to 
those bare-faced scoundrels." 

" What bare-faced scoundrels ? " 

" Them that have the club." 

" But all the members have the club between 
them." 

" Havers ! I'm no to be catched with chaff." 

" But don't you believe me ? " 

" I believe they've filled your head with their 
stories till you swallow whatever they tell you. 
If the place belongs to the members, why do they 
have to pay thirty pounds ? " 

" To keep it going." 

" They dinna have to pay for their dinners, 
then?" 

66 Oh, yes, they have to pay extra for dinner." 

"And a gey black price, I'm thinking." 

" Well, five or six shillings." 

" Is that all ? Losh, it's nothing. I wonder 
they dinna raise the price." 

Nevertheless my mother was of a sex that 
scorned prejudice, and, dropping sarcasm, she 
would at times cross-examine me as if her mind 
was not yet made up. "Tell me this, if you were 

273 



MARGARET OGILVY 

to fall ill, would you be paid a weekly allowance 
out of the club 4 ?" 

No, it was not that kind of club. 

" I see. Well, I am just trying to find out 
what kind of club it is. Do you get anything out 
of it for accidents?" 

Not a penny. 

" Anything at New Year's time ? " 

Not so much as a goose. 

" Is there any one mortal thing you get free 
out of that club ? " 

There was not one mortal thing. 

"And thirty pounds is what you pay for this?" 

If the committee elected me. 

" How many are in the committee ? " 

About a dozen, I thought. 

" A dozen ! Ay, ay, that makes two pound ten 
apiece." 

When I was elected I thought it wisdom to 
send my sister upstairs with the news. My mother 
was ironing, and made no comment, unless with 
the iron, which I could hear rattling more vio- 
lently in its box. Presently I heard her laughing 
— at me undoubtedly, but she had recovered con- 
trol over her face before she came downstairs to 
congratulate me sarcastically. This was grand 
news, she said without a twinkle, and I must write 
and thank the committee, the noble critturs. I 
saw behind her mask, and maintained a dignified 

274 



AN EDITOR 

silence, but she would have another shot at me, 
"And tell them," she said from the door, "you 
were doubtful of being elected, but your auld 
mother had aye a mighty confidence they would 
snick you in." I heard her laughing softly as she 
went up the stair, but though I had provided her 
with a joke I knew she was burning to tell the 
committee what she thought of them. 

Money, you see, meant so much to her, though 
even at her poorest she was the most cheerful 
giver. In the old days, when the article arrived, 
she did not read it at once, she first counted the 
lines to discover what we should get for it — she 
and the daughter who was so dear to her had cal- 
culated the payment per line, and I remember 
once overhearing a discussion between them about 
whether that sub-title meant another sixpence. 
Yes, she knew the value of money; she had al- 
ways in the end got the things she wanted, but 
now she could get them more easily, and it turned 
her simple life into a fairy tale. So often in those 
days she went down suddenly upon her knees; 
we would come upon her thus, and go away noise- 
lessly. After her death I found that she had pre- 
served in a little box, with a photograph of me as 
a child, the envelopes which had contained my 
first cheques. There was a little ribbon round 
them. 

275 



CHAPTER V 

A DAY OF HER LIFE 

I should like to call back a day of her life as it 
was at this time, when her spirit was as bright as 
ever and her hand as eager, but she was no longer 
able to do much work. It should not be difficult, 
for she repeated herself from day to day, and yet 
did it with a quaint unreasonableness that was 
ever yielding fresh delight. Our love for her was 
such that we could easily tell what she would do 
in given circumstances, but she had always a new 
way of doing it. 

Well, with break of day she wakes and sits up 
in bed and is standing in the middle of the room. 
So nimble was she in the mornings (one of our 
troubles with her) that these three actions must be 
considered as one ; she is on the floor before you 
have time to count them. She has strict orders 
not to rise until her fire is lit, and having broken 
them there is a demure elation on her face. The 
question is what to do before she is caught and 
hurried to bed again. Her fingers are tingling to 
prepare the breakfast; she would dearly love to 

276 



A DAY OF HER LIFE 

black-lead the grate, but that might rouse her 
daughter from whose side she has slipped so cun- 
ningly. She catches sight of the screen at the foot 
of the bed, and immediately her soft face becomes 
very determined. To guard her from draughts 
the screen had been brought here from the lordly 
east room, where it was of no use whatever. But 
in her opinion it was too beautiful for use ; it be- 
longed to the east room, where she could take 
pleasant peeps at it; she had objected to its re- 
moval, even become low-spirited. Now is her 
opportunity. The screen is an unwieldy thing, 
but still as a mouse she carries it, and they are 
well under way when it strikes against the gas- 
bracket in the passage. Next moment a reproach- 
ful hand arrests her. She is challenged with being 
out of bed, she denies it — standing in the pas- 
sage. Meekly or stubbornly she returns to bed, 
and it is no satisfaction to you that you can say, 
" Well, well, of all the women ! " and so on, or 
"Surely you knew that the screen was brought 
here to protect you/' for she will reply scornfully, 
" Who was touching the screen?" 

By this time I have awakened (I am through 
the wall) and join them anxiously : so often has 
my mother been taken ill in the night that the 
slightest sound from her room rouses the house. 
She is in bed again, looking as if she had never 
been out of it, but I know her and listen sternly 

277 



MARGARET OGILVY 

to the tale of her misdoings. She is not contrite. 
Yes, maybe she did promise not to venture forth 
on the cold floors of daybreak, but she had risen 
for a moment only, and we just t'neaded her with 
our talk about draughts — there were no such 
things as draughts in her young days — and it is 
more than she can do (here she again attempts to 
rise, but we hold her down) to lie there and watch 
that beautiful screen being spoilt. I reply that 
the beauty of the screen has ever been its miser- 
able defect : ho, there ! for a knife with which to 
spoil its beauty and make the bedroom its fitting 
home. As there is no knife handy, my foot will 
do ; I raise my foot, and then — she sees that it is 
bare, she cries to me excitedly to go back to bed 
lest I catch cold. For though, ever careless of 
herself, she will wander the house unshod, and tell 
us not to talk havers when we chide her, the sight 
of one of us similarly negligent rouses her anxiety 
at once. She is willing now to sign any vow if 
only I will take my bare feet back to bed, but 
probably she is soon after me in hers to make sure 
that I am nicely covered up. 

It is scarcely six o'clock, and we have all prom- 
ised to sleep for another hour, but in ten minutes 
she is sure that eight has struck (house disgraced), 
or that if it has not, something is wrong with the 
clock. Next moment she is captured on her way 
downstairs to wind up the clock. So evidently 

278 



A DAY OF HER LIFE 

we must be up and doing, and as we have no ser- 
vant, my sister disappears into the kitchen, having 
first asked me to see that "that woman" lies still, and 
" that woman " calls out that she always does lie 
still, so what are we blethering about? 

She is up now, and dressed in her thick maroon 
wrapper; over her shoulders (lest she should stray 
despite our watchfulness) is a shawl, not placed 
there by her own hands, and on her head a deli- 
cious mutch. O, that I could sing the psean of 
the white mutch (and the dirge of the elaborate 
black cap) from the day when she called witch- 
craft to her aid and made it out of snow-flakes, and 
the dear worn hands that washed it tenderly in a 
basin, and the starching of it, and the finger-iron 
for its exquisite frills that looked like curls of 
sugar, and the sweet bands with which it tied be- 
neath the chin ! The honoured snowy mutch, 
how I love to see it smiling to me from the doors 
and windows of the poor; it is always smiling — 
sometimes maybe a wavering, wistful smile, as if 
a tear-drop lay hidden among the frills. A hun- 
dred times I have taken the characterless cap firmm 
my mother's head and put the mutch in its place* 
and tied the bands beneath her chin, while she- 
protested but was well pleased. For in her heart; 
she knew what suited her best, and would admit it^, 
beaming, when I put a mirror into her hands and 
told her to look ; but nevertheless the cap cost no 

279 



MARGARET OGILVY 

less than so and so, whereas Was that a 

knock at the door? She is gone, to put on her 
cap ! 

She begins the day by the fireside with the New 
Testament in her hands, an old volume with its 
loose pages beautifully refixed, and its covers sewn 
and resewn by her, so that you would say it can 
never fall to pieces. It is mine now, and to me 
the black threads with which she stitched it are as 
part of the contents. Other books she read in the 
ordinary manner, but this one differently, her lips 
moving with each word as if she were reading 
aloud, and her face very solemn. The Testament 
lies open on her lap long after she has ceased to 
read, and the expression of her face has not changed. 

I have seen her reading other books early in the 
day, but never without a guilty look on her face, 
for she thought reading was scarce respectable 
until night had come. She spends the forenoon 
in what she calls doing nothing, which may con- 
sist in stitching so hard that you would swear she 
was an over-worked seamstress at it for her life, or 
you will find her on a table with nails in her mouth, 
and anon she has to be chased from the garret (she 
has suddenly decided to change her curtains), or 
she is under the bed searching for bandboxes and 
asking sternly where we have put that bonnet. 
On the whole, she is behaving in a most exemplary 
way to-day (not once have we caught her trying 

280 



A DAY OF HER LIFE 

to go out into the washing-house), and we compli- 
ment her at dinner-time, partly because she de- 
serves it, and partly to make her think herself so 
good that she will eat something, just to maintain 
her new character. I question whether one hour 
of all her life was given to thoughts of food; in 
her great days to eat seemed to her to be waste of 
time, and afterwards she only ate to boast of it, as 
something she had done to please us. She seldom 
remembered whether she had dined, but always 
presumed she had, and while she was telling me 
in all good faith what the meal consisted of, it 
might be brought in. When in London I had to 
hear daily what she was eating, and perhaps she 
had refused all dishes until they produced the pen 
and ink. These were flourished before her, and 
then she would say with a sigh, "Tell him I am to 
eat an egg." But they were not so easily deceived ; 
they waited, pen in hand, until the egg was eaten. 
She never " went for a walk " in her life. Many 
long trudges she had as a girl when she carried 
her father's dinner in a flaggon to the country 
place where he was at work, but to walk with no 
end save the good of your health seemed a very 
droll proceeding to her. In her young days, she 
was positive, no one had ever gone for a walk, 
and she never lost the belief that it was an ab- 
surdity introduced by a new generation with too 
much time on their hands. That they enjoyed it 

281 



MARGARET OGILVY 

she could not believe ; It was merely a form of 
showing off, and as they passed her window she 
would remark to herself with blasting satire, "Ay, 
Jeames, are you off for your walk ? " and add 
fervently, "Rather you than me!" I was one of 
those who walked, and though she smiled, and 
might drop a sarcastic word when she saw me put- 
ting on my boots, it was she who had heated them 
in preparation for my going. The arrangement 
between us was that she should lie down until my 
return, and to ensure its being carried out I saw 
her in bed before I started; but with the bang of 
the door she would be at the window to watch 
me go: there is one spot on the road where a 
thousand times I have turned to wave my stick to 
her, while she nodded and smiled and kissed her 
hand to me. That kissing of the hand was the 
one English custom she had learned. 

In an hour or so I return, and perhaps find her 
in bed, according to promise, but still I am suspi- 
cious. The way to her detection is circuitous. 

" I'll need to be rising now," she says, with a 
yawn that may be genuine. 

" How long have you been in bed ? " 

" You saw me go." 

"And then I saw you at the window. Did you 
go straight back to bed ? " 

" Surely I had that much sense." 

" The truth ! " 

282 



A DAY OF HER LIFE 

66 1 might have taken a look at the clock first." 

"It is a terrible thing to have a mother who 
prevaricates. Have you been lying down ever 
since I left?" 

" Thereabout." 

" What does that mean exactly ? " 

"Off and on." 

" Have you been to the garret?" 

" What should I do in the garret ? " 

" But have you ? " 

" I might just have looked up the garret stair." 

" You have been redding up the garret again ! " 

" Not what you could call a redd up." 

" O, woman, woman, I believe you have not 
been in bed at all ! " 

" You see me in it." 

" My opinion is that you jumped into bed when 
you heard me open the door." 

" Havers." 

" Did you ? " 

" No." 

" Well, then, when you heard me at the gate ? " 

" It might have been when I heard you at the 
gate." 

As daylight goes she follows it with her sewing 
to the window, and gets another needleful out of 
it, as one may run after a departed visitor for a last 
word ; but now the gas is lit, and no longer is it 
shameful to sit down to literature. If the book be 

283 



MARGARET OGILVY 

a story by George Eliot or Mrs. Oliphant, her 
favourite (and mine) among women novelists, or 
if it be a Carlyle, and we move softly, she will 
read, entranced, for hours. Her delight in Car- 
lyle was so well known that various good people 
would send her books that contained a page about 
him ; she could place her finger on any passage 
wanted in the biography as promptly as though 
she were looking for some article in her own 
drawer, and given a date she was often able to tell 
you what they were doing in Cheyne Row that day. 
Carlyle, she decided, was not so much an ill man 
to live with as one who needed a deal of manag- 
ing; but when I asked if she thought she could 
have managed him she only replied with a modest 
smile that meant " Oh, no ! " but had the face of 
" Sal, I would have liked to try." 

One lady lent her some scores of Carlyle letters 
that have never been published, and crabbed was 
the writing ; but though my mother liked to have 
our letters read aloud to her, she read every one 
of these herself, and would quote from them in 
her talk. Side by side with the Carlyle letters, 
which show him in his most gracious light, were 
many from his wife to a friend, and in one of 
these a romantic adventure is described — I quote 
from memory, and it is a poor memory compared 
to my mother's, which registered everything by a 
method of her own : " What might be the age of 

284 



A DAY OF HER LIFE 

Bell Tibbits? Well, she was born the week I 
bought the boiler, so she'll be one-and-fifty (no 
less !) come Martinmas." Mrs. Carlyle had got 
into the train at a London station and was feeling 
very lonely, for the journey to Scotland lay before 
her and no one had come to see her off. Then, 
just as the train was starting, a man jumped into 
the carriage : to her regret until she saw his face, 
when, behold, they were old friends, and the last 
time they met (I forget how many years before) 
he had asked her to be his wife. He was very 
nice, and, if I remember aright, saw her to her 
journey's end, though he had intended to alight 
at some half-way place. I call this an adventure, 
and I am sure it seemed to my mother to be the 
most touching and memorable adventure that can 
come into a woman's life. " You see he hadna 
forgot," she would say proudly, as if this was a 
compliment in which all her sex could share, and 
on her old tender face shone some of the elation 
with which Mrs. Carlyle wrote that letter. 

But there were times, she held, when Carlyle 
must have made his wife a glorious woman. "As 
when *? " I might inquire. 

" When she keeked in at his study door and 
said to herself, 4 The whole world is ringing with 
his fame, and he is my man ! ' " 

"And then," I might point out, "he would roar 
to her to shut the door." 

285 



MARGARET OGILVY 

" Pooh," said my mother, " a man's roar is 
neither here nor there." But her verdict as a 
whole was, " I would rather have been his mother 
than his wife." 

So we have got her into her chair with the Car- 
lyles, and all is well. Furthermore, " to mak sic- 
car," my father has taken the opposite side of the 
fireplace and is deep in the latest five columns of 
Gladstone, who is his Carlyle. He is to see that 
she does not slip away fired by a conviction, which 
suddenly over-rides her pages, that the kitchen is 
going to rack and ruin for want of her, and she is 
to recall him to himself should he put his foot in 
the fire and keep it there, forgetful of all save his 
hero's eloquence. (We were a family who needed 
a deal of watching.) She is not interested in what 
Mr. Gladstone has to say; indeed she could never 
be brought to look upon politics as of serious con- 
cern for grown folk (a class in which she scarcely 
included man), and she gratefully gave up reading 
" leaders " the day I ceased to write them. But 
like want of reasonableness, a love for having the 
last word, want of humour and the like, politics 
were in her opinion a mannish attribute to be tol- 
erated, and Gladstone was the name of the some- 
thing which makes all our sex such queer char- 
acters. She had a profound faith in him as an 
aid to conversation, and if there were silent men 
in the company would give him to them to talk 

286 



A DAY OF HER LIFE 

about, precisely as she divided a cake among chil- 
dren. And then, with a motherly smile, she would 
leave them to gorge on him. But in the idolising 
of Gladstone she recognised, nevertheless, a cer- 
tain inevitability, and would no more have tried 
to contend with it than to sweep a shadow off the 
floor. Gladstone was, and there was an end of it 
in her practical philosophy. Nor did she accept 
him coldly; like a true woman she sympathised 
with those who suffered severely, and they knew 
it and took counsel of her in the hour of need. I 
remember one ardent Gladstonian who, as a gen- 
eral election drew near, was in sore straits indeed, 
for he disbelieved in Home Rule, and yet how 
could he vote against " Gladstone's man " ? His 
distress was so real that it gave him a hang-dog 
appearance. He put his case gloomily before her, 
and until the day of the election she riddled him 
with sarcasm ; I think he only went to her because 
he found a mournful enjoyment in seeing a false 
Gladstonian tortured. 

It was all such plain sailing for him, she pointed 
out; he did not like this Home Rule, and there- 
fore he must vote against it. 

She put it pitiful clear, he replied with a groan. 

But she was like another woman to him when 
he appeared before her on his way to the polling- 
booth. 

, " This is a watery Sabbath to you, Pm think- 

287 



MARGARET OGILVY 

ing," she said sympathetically, but without drop- 
ping her wires — for, Home Rule or no Home 
Rule, that stocking-foot must be turned before 
twelve o'clock. 

A watery Sabbath means a doleful day, and 
"A watery Sabbath it is," he replied with feeling. 
A silence followed, broken only by the click of 
the wires. Now and again he would mutter, 
"Ay, well, I'll be going to vote — little did I 
think the day would come," and so on ; but if he 
rose it was only to sit down again, and at last she 
crossed over to him and said softly (no sarcasm 
in her voice now), " Away with you, and vote for 
Gladstone's man!" He jumped up and made off 
without a word, but from the east window we 
watched him strutting down the brae. I laughed, 
but she said, "I'm no sure that it's a laughing 
matter," and afterwards, " I would have liked fine 
to be that Gladstone's mother." 

It is nine o'clock now, a quarter past nine, half- 
past nine — all the same moment to me, for I am 
at a sentence that will not write. I know, though 
I can't hear, what my sister has gone upstairs to 
say to- my mother : 

" I was in at him at nine, and he said, ' In five 
minutes,' so I put the steak on the brander, but 
I've been in thrice since then, and every time he 
says, ' In five minutes,' and when I try to take 
the table-cover off, he presses his elbows hard on 

288 



A DAY OF HER LIFE 

it, and growls. His supper will be completely 
spoilt." 

" Oh, that weary writing ! " 

" I can do no more, mother, so you must come 
down and stop him." 

" I have no power over him," my mother says, 
but she rises smiling, and presently she is opening 
my door. 

" In five minutes ! " I cry, but when I see that 
it is she I rise and put my arm round her. " What 
a full basket ! " she says, looking at the waste- 
paper basket which contains most of my work of 
the night, and with a dear gesture she lifts up a 
torn page and kisses it. " Poor thing," she says 
to it, " and you would have liked so fine to be 
printed!" and she puts her hand over my desk to 
prevent my writing more. 

" In the last five minutes," I begin, " one can 
often do more than in the first hour." 

" Many a time I've said it in my young days," 
she says slowly. 

" And proved it, too ! " cries a voice from the 
door, the voice of one who was prouder of her 
even than I ; it is true, and yet almost unbeliev- 
able, that any one could have been prouder of her 
than I. 

"But those days are gone," my mother says 
solemnly, "gone to come back no more. You'll 
put by your work now, man, and have your sup- 

280 



MARGARET OGILVY 

per, and then you'll come up and sit beside youi 
mother for a whiley, for soon you'll be putting 
her away in the kirk-yard." 

I hear such a little cry from near the door. 

So my mother and I go up the stair together. 
"We have changed places," she says; "that was 
just how I used to help you up, but I'm the bairn 
now." 

She brings out the Testament again ; it was al- 
ways lying within reach ; it is the lock of hair she 
left me when she died. And when she has read 
for a long time she " gives me a look," as we say 
in the north, and I go out, to leave her alone with 
God. She had been but a child when her mother 
died, and so she fell early into the way of saying 
her prayers with no earthly listener. Often and 
often I have found her on her knees, but I always 
went softly away, closing the door. I never heard 
her pray, but I know very well how she prayed, 
and that, when that door was shut, there was not 
a day in God's sight between the worn woman and 
the little child. 



290 



CHAPTER VI 

HER MAID OF ALL WORK 

And sometimes I was her maid of all work. 

It is early morn, and my mother has come noise- 
lessly into my room. I know it is she, though 
my eyes are shut, and I am only half awake. Per- 
haps I was dreaming of her, for I accept her pres- 
ence without surprise, as if in the awakening I had 
but seen her go out at one door to come in at an- 
other. But she is speaking to herself. 

" Pm sweer to waken him — I doubt he was 
working late — oh, that weary writing — no, I 
maunna waken him." 

I start up. She is wringing her hands. " What 
is wrong?" I cry, but I know before she answers. 
My sister is down with one of the headaches against 
which even she cannot fight, and my mother, who 
bears physical pain as if it were a comrade, is most 
woe-begone when her daughter is the sufferer. 
" And she winna let me go down the stair to make 
a cup of tea for her," she groans. 

" I will soon make the tea, mother." 

" Will you ? " she says eagerly. It is what she 
291 



MARGARET OGILVY 

has come to me for, but " It is a pity to rouse you," 
she says. 

"And I will take charge of the house to-day, 
and light the fires and wash the dishes " 

66 Na, oh, no ; no, I couldna ask that of you, and 
you an author." 

" It won't be the first time, mother, since I was 
an author." 

"More like the fiftieth! 15 she says almost glee- 
fully, so I have begun well, for to keep up her 
spirits is the great thing to-day. 

Knock at the door. It is the baker. I take in 
the bread, looking so sternly at him that he dare 
not smile. 

Knock at the door. It is the postman. (I hope 
he did not see that I had the lid of the kettle in 
my other hand.) 

Furious knocking in a remote part. This means 
that the author is in the coal-cellar. 

Anon I carry two breakfasts upstairs in triumph. 
I enter the bedroom like no mere humdrum son, 
but after the manner of the Glasgow waiter. I 
must say more about him. He had been my 
mother's one waiter, the only man-servant she ever 
came in contact with, and they had met in a Glas- 
gow hotel which she was eager to see, having 
heard of the monstrous things, and conceived them 
to resemble country inns with another twelve bed- 
rooms. I remember how she beamed — yet tried 

2Q2 



HER MAID OF ALL WORK 

to look as if it was quite an ordinary experience — 
when we alighted at the hotel door, but though she 
said nothing I soon read disappointment in her face. 
She knew how I was exulting in having her there, 
so would not say a word to damp me, but I craft- 
ily drew it out of her. No, she was very com- 
fortable, and the house was grand beyond speech, 
but — but — where was he ? he had not been very 
hearty. "He" was the landlord; she had ex- 
pected him to receive us at the door and ask if 
we were in good health and how we had left the 
others, and then she would have asked him if his 
wife was well and how many children they had, 
after which we should have all sat down together 
to dinner. Two chambermaids came into her 
room and prepared it without a single word to 
her about her journey or on any other subject, and 
when they had gone, " They are two haughty 
misses," said my mother with spirit. But what 
she most resented was the waiter with his swagger 
black suit and short quick steps and the " towel '' 
over his arm. Without so much as a " Welcome 
to Glasgow ! " he showed us to our seats, not the 
smallest acknowledgment of our kindness in giv- 
ing such munificent orders did we draw from him, 
he hovered around the table as if it would be un- 
safe to leave us with his knives and forks (he 
should have seen her knives and forks), when we 
spoke to each other he affected not to hear, we 

2 93 



MARGARET OGILVY 

might laugh, but this uppish fellow would not 
join in, we retired, crushed, and he had the final 
impudence to open the door for us. But though 
this hurt my mother at the time, the humour of 
our experiences filled her on reflection, and in her 
own house she would describe them with unction, 
sometimes to those who had been in many hotels, 
often to others who had been in none, and who- 
ever were her listeners she made them laugh, though 
not always at the same thing. 

So now when I enter the bedroom with the tray, 
on my arm is that badge of pride, the towel ; and 
I approach with prim steps to inform Madam that 
breakfast is ready, and she puts on the society 
manner and addresses me as " Sir," and asks with 
cruel sarcasm for what purpose (except to boast) I 
carry the towel, and I say, " Is there anything more 
I can do for Madam ? " and Madam replies that 
there is one more thing I can do, and that is, eat 
her breakfast for her. But of this I take no notice, 
for my object is to fire her with the spirit of the 
game, so that she eats unwittingly. 

Now that I have washed up the breakfast things 
I should be at my writing, and I am anxious to be 
at it, as I have an idea in my head, which, if it is 
of any value, has almost certainly been put there 
by her. But dare I venture? I know that the 
house has not been properly set going yet, there are 
beds to make, the exterior of the teapot is fair, but 

294 



HER MAID OF ALL WORK 

suppose some one were to look inside ? What a 
pity I knocked over the flour-barrel ! Can I hope 
that for once my mother will forget to inquire into 
these matters? Is my sister willing to let disor- 
der reign until to-morrow ? I determine to risk it. 
Perhaps I have been at work for half-an-hour 
when I hear movements overhead. One or other 
of them is wondering why the house is so quiet. 
I rattle the tongs, but even this does not satisfy 
them, so back into the desk go my papers, and 
now what you hear is not the scrape of a pen, but 
the rinsing of pots and pans, or I am making beds, 
and making them thoroughly, because after I am 
gone my mother will come (I know her) and look 
suspiciously beneath the coverlet. 

The kitchen is now speckless, not an unwashed 
platter in sight, unless you look beneath the table. 
I feel that I have earned time for an hour's writing 
at last, and at it I go with vigour. One page, two 
pages, really I am making progress, when — was 
that a door opening ? But I have my mother's 
light step on the brain, so I " yoke " again, and 
next moment she is beside me. She has not ex- 
actly left her room, she gives me to understand; 
but suddenly a conviction had come to her that I 
was writing without a warm mat at my feet. She 
carries one in her hands. Now that she is here, she 
remains for a time, and though she is in the arm- 
chair by the fire, where she sits bolt upright (she 

295 



MARGARET OGILVY 

loved to have cushions on the unused chairs, but 
detested putting her back against them), and I am 
bent low over my desk, I know that contentment 
and pity are struggling for possession of her face : 
contentment wins when she surveys her room, pity 
when she looks at me. Every article of furniture, 
from the chairs that came into the world with me 
and have worn so much better, though I was new 
and they were second-hand, to the mantel-border 
of fashionable design which she sewed in her 
seventieth year, having picked up the stitch in half 
a lesson, has its story of fight and attainment for 
her, hence her satisfaction ; but she sighs at sight 
of her son, dipping and tearing, and chewing the 
loathly pen. 

" Oh, that weary writing ! " 

In vain do I tell her that writing is as pleasant 
to me as ever was the prospect of a tremendous 
day's ironing to her; that (to some, though not to 
me) new chapters are as easy to turn out as new 
bannocks. No, she maintains, for one bannock 
is the marrows of another, while chapters — and 
then, perhaps, her eyes twinkle, and says she 
saucily, " But, sal, you may be right, for some- 
times your bannocks are as alike as mine !" 

Or I may be roused from my writing by her 
cry that I am making strange faces again. It is 
my contemptible weakness that if I say a char- 
acter smiled vacuously, I must smile vacuously; 

296 



HER MAID OF ALL WORK 

if he frowns or leers, I frown or leer; if he is a 
coward or given to contortions, I cringe, or twist 
my legs until I have to stop writing to undo the 
knot. I bow with him, eat with him, and gnaw 
my moustache with him. If the character be a 
lady with an exquisite laugh, I suddenly terrify 
you by laughing exquisitely. One reads of the 
astounding versatility of an actor who is stout and 
lean on the same evening, but what is he to the 
novelist who is a dozen persons within the hour? 
Morally, I fear, we must deteriorate — but this is 
a subject I may wisely edge away from. 

We always spoke to each other in broad Scotch 
(I think in it still), but now and again she would 
use a word that was new to me, or I might hear 
one of her contemporaries use it. Now is my op- 
portunity to angle for its meaning. If I ask, 
boldly, what was that word she used just now, 
something like " bilbie " or "silvendy"? she 
blushes, and says she never said anything so com- 
mon, or hoots, it is some auld-farrant word about 
which she can tell me nothing. But if in the 
course of conversation I remark casually, "Did 
he find bilbie ? " or " Was that quite silvendy ? " 
(though the sense of the question is vague to me) 
she falls into the trap, and the words explain 
themselves in her replies. Or maybe to-day she 
sees whither I am leading her, and such is her sen- 
sitiveness that she is quite hurt. The humour 

297 



MARGARET OGILVY 

goes out of her face (to find bilbie in some more 
silvendy spot), and her reproachful eyes — but 
now I am on the arm of her chair, and we have 
made it up. Nevertheless, I shall get no more 
old-world Scotch out of her this forenoon, she 
weeds her talk determinedly, and it is as great a 
falling away as when the mutch gives place to 
the cap. 

I am off for my afternoon walk, and she has 
promised to bar the door behind me and open it 
to none. When I return, — well, the door is still 
barred, but she is looking both furtive and elated. 
I should say that she is burning to tell me some- 
thing, but cannot tell it without exposing herself. 
Has she opened the door, and if so, why ? I don't 
ask, but I watch. It is she who is sly now : 

" Have you been in the east room since you 
came in?" she asks with apparent indifference. 

" No ; why do you ask ? " 

" Oh, I just thought you might have looked in." 

" Is there anything new there ? " 

" I dinna say there is, but— but just go and see." 

" There can't be anything new if you kept the 
door barred," I say cleverly. 

This crushes her for a moment; but her eager- 
ness that I should see is greater than her fear. I 
set off for the east room, and she follows, affecting 
humility, but with triumph in her eye. How of- 
ten those little scenes took place ! I was never 

298 



HER MAID OF ALL WORK 

told of the new purchase, I was lured into its 
presence, and then she waited timidly for my start 
of surprise. 

" Do you see it ? " she says anxiously, and I see 
it, and hear it, for this time it is a bran-new wicker 
chair, of the kind that whisper to themselves for 
the first six months. 

"A going-about body was selling them in a 
cart," my mother begins, and what followed pre- 
sents itself to my eyes before she can utter another 
word. Ten minutes at the least did she stand at 
the door argybargying with that man. But it 
would be cruelty to scold a woman so uplifted. 

"Fifteen shillings he wanted," she cries, "but 
what do you think I beat him down to?" 

" Seven and sixpence ? " 

She clasps her hands with delight. " Four shil- 
lings, as I'm a living woman ! " she crows : never 
was a woman fonder of a bargain. 

I gaze at the purchase with the amazement ex- 
pected of me, and the chair itself crinkles and 
shudders to hear what it went for (or is it merely 
chuckling at her?). "And the man said it cost 
himself five shillings," my mother continues ex- 
ultantly. You would have thought her the hard- 
est person had not a knock on the wall summoned 
us about this time to my sister's side. Though in 
bed, she has been listening, and this is what she 
has to say, in a voice that makes my mother very 

299 



MARGARET OGILVY 

indignant, " You drive a bargain ! I 'm thinking 
ten shillings was nearer what you paid." 

"Four shillings to a penny!" says my mother. 

"I daresay," says my sister; "but after you 
paid him the money I heard you in the little bed- 
room press. What were you doing there ? " 

My mother winces. " I may have given him 
a present of an old top-coat," she falters. " He 
looked ill-happit. But that was after I made the 
bargain." 

" Were there bairns in the cart?" 

" There might have been a bit lassie in the 
cart." 

" I thought as much. What did you give her ? 
I heard you in the pantry." 

"Four shillings was what I got that chair for," 
replies my mother firmly. If I don't interfere 
there will be a coldness between them for at least 
a minute. " There is blood on your finger," I 
say to my mother. 

"So there is," she says, concealing her hand. 

" Blood ! " exclaims my sister anxiously, and 
then with a cry of triumph, " I warrant it's jelly. 
You gave that lassie one of the jelly-cans ! " 

The Glasgow waiter brings up tea, and presently 
my sister is able to rise, and after a sharp fight 
I am expelled from the kitchen. The last thing I 
do as maid of all work is to lug upstairs the clothes- 
basket which has just arrived with the mangling. 

300 



HER MAID OF ALL WORK 

Nowthere is delicious linen for my mother to finger; 
there was always rapture on her face when the 
clothes-basket came in; it never failed to make her 
once more the active genius of the house. I may 
leave her now with her sheets and collars and nap- 
kins and fronts. Indeed, she probably orders me 
to go. A son is all very well, but suppose he were 
to tread on that counterpane ! 

My sister is but and I am ben — I mean she is 
in the east end and I am in the west — tuts, tuts, 
let us get at the English of this by striving: she is 
in the kitchen and I am at my desk in the parlour. 
I hope I may not be disturbed, for to-night I must 
make my hero say "' Darling," and it needs both 
privacy and concentration. In a word, let me ad- 
mit (though I should like to beat about the bush) 
that I have sat down to a love-chapter. Too long 
has it been avoided, Albert has called Marion 
"dear" only as yet (between you and me, these 
are not their real names), but though the public 
will probably read the word without blinking, it 
went off in my hands with a bang. They tell me 
— the Sassenach tell me — that in time I shall be 
able without a blush to make Albert say " darling," 
and even gather her up in his arms, but I begin to 
doubt it ; the moment sees me as shy as ever ; I 
still find it advisable to lock the door, and then — 
no witness save the dog — I "do " it dourly with my 
teeth clenched, while the dog retreats into the far 

301 



MARGARET OGILVY 

corner and moans. The bolder Englishman (1 
am told) will write a love-chapter and then go out, 
quite coolly, to dinner, but such goings on are 
contrary to the Scotch nature ; even the great 
novelists dared not. Conceive Mr. Stevenson left 
alone with a hero, a heroine, and a proposal im- 
pending (he does not know where to look). Sir 
Walter in the same circumstances gets out of the 
room by making his love-scenes take place between 
the end of one chapter and the beginning of the 
next, but he could afford to do anything, and the 
small fry must e'en to their task, moan the dog as 
he may. So I have yoked to mine when, enter my 
mother, looking wistful. 

" I suppose you are terrible thrarig," she says. 

"Well, I am rather busy, but — what is it you 
want me to do ? " 

" It would be a shame to ask you/' 

" Still, ask me." 

" I am so terrified they may be filed." 

*' You want me to " 

*' If you would just come up, and help me to 
fold the sheets ! " 

The sheets are folded and I return to Albert. 
I lock the door and at last I am bringing my hero 
forward nicely (my knee in the small of his back), 
when this startling question is shot by my sister 
through the keyhole : 

" Where did you put the carrot-grater?" 
302 



HER MAID OF ALL WORK 

It will all have to be done over again if I let 
Albert go for a moment, so, gripping him hard, I 
shout indignantly that I have not seen the carrot- 
grater. 

" Then what did you grate the carrots on ? " 
asks the voice, and the door-handle is shaken just 
as I shake Albert. 

"On a broken cup," I reply with surprising 
readiness, and I get to work again, but am less en- 
grossed, for a conviction grows on me that I put the 
carrot-grater in the drawer of the sewing-machine* 

I am wondering whether I should confess or 
brazen it out, when I hear my sister going hur- 
riedly upstairs. I have a presentiment that she 
has gone to talk about me, and I basely open my 
door and listen. 

" Just look at that, mother ! " 

" Is it a dish-cloth ? " 

" That's what it is now." 

" Losh behears ! it's one of the new table-nap- 
kins." 

" That's what it was. He has been polishing 
the kitchen grate with it ! " 

(I remember!) 

" Woe's me ! That is what comes of his not let- 
ting me budge from this room. O, it is a watery 
Sabbath when men take to doing women's work ! " 

" It defies the face of clay, mother, to fathom 
what makes him so senseless." 

303 



MARGARET OGILVY 

* Oh, it's that weary writing." 

" And the worst of it is, he will talk to-morrow 
as if he had done wonders." 

" That's the way with the whole clanjamfray of 
them." 

"Yes, but as usual you will humour him, 
mother." 

"Oh, well, it pleases him, you see," says my 
mother, " and we can have our laugh when his 
door's shut." 

" He is most terribly handless." 

" He is all that, but, poor soul, he does his best/' 



3<H 



CHAPTER VII 

R. L. S. 

These familiar initials are, I suppose, the best be- 
loved in recent literature, certainly they are the 
sweetest to me, but there was a time when my 
mother could not abide them. She said " That 
Stevenson man" with a sneer, and it was never 
easy to her to sneer. At thought of him her face 
would become almost hard, which seems incred- 
ible, and she would knit her lips and fold her 
arms, and reply with a stiff " oh " if you mentioned 
his aggravating name. In the novels we have a 
way of writing of our heroine, " she drew herself 
up haughtily," and when mine draw themselves 
up haughtily I see my mother thinking of Robert 
Louis Stevenson. He knew her opinion of him, 
and would write, "My ears tingled yesterday; I 
sair doubt she has been miscalling me again." 
But the more she miscalled him the more he de- 
lighted in her, and she was informed of this, and 
at once said " The scoundrel ! " If you would 
know what was his unpardonable crime, it was 
this, he wrote better books than mine. 

30X 



MARGARET OGILVY 

I remember the day she found it out, which was 
not, however, the day she admitted it. That day, 
when I should have been at my work, she came 
upon me in the kitchen, " The Master of Ballan- 
trae " beside me, but I was not reading : my head 
lay heavy on the table and to her anxious eyes, I 
doubt not, I was the picture of woe. " Not writ- 
ing!" I echoed, no, I was not writing, I saw no 
use in ever trying to write again. And down, I 
suppose, went my head once more. She misun- 
derstood, and thought the blow had fallen ; I had 
awakened to the discovery, always dreaded by 
her, that I had written myself dry ; I was no bet- 
ter than an empty ink-bottle. She wrung her 
hands, but indignation came to her with my ex- 
planation, which was that while R. L. S. was at it 
we others were only 'prentices cutting our fingers 
on his tools. " I could never thole his books," 
said my mother immediately, and indeed vin- 
dictively. 

" You have not read any of them," I reminded 
her. 

" And never will," said she with spirit. 

And I have no doubt that she called him a 
dark character that very day. For weeks too, if 
not for months, she adhered to her determination 
not to read him, though I, having come to my 
senses and seen that there is a place for the 'pren- 
tice, was taking a pleasure, almost malicious, in 

306 



R. L. S. 

putting " The Master of Ballantrae " in her way, 
I would place it on her table so that it said good- 
morning to her when she rose. She would frown, 
and, carrying it downstairs, as if she had it in 
the tongs, replace it on its book-shelf I would 
wrap it up in the cover she had made for the latest 
Carlyle : she would skin it contemptuously and 
again bring it down. I would hide her spectacles 
in it, and lay it on top of the clothes-basket and 
prop it up invitingly open against her tea-pot. 
And at last I got her, though I forget by which 
of many contrivances. What I recall vividly is a 
key-hole view, to which another member of the 
family invited me. Then I saw my mother 
wrapped up in " The Master of Ballantrae " and 
muttering the music to herself, nodding her head 
in approval, and taking a stealthy glance at the 
foot of each page before she began at the top. 
Nevertheless she had an ear for the door, for when 
I bounced in she had been too clever for me; 
there was no book to be seen, only an apron on 
her lap and she was gazing out at the window. 
Some such conversation as this followed : 

" You have been sitting very quietly, mother.' 1 
" I always sit quietly, I never do anything, Pm 
just a finished stocking." 

"Have you been reading?" 

" Do I ever read at this time of day ? " 

" What is that in your lap ? " 

3°7 



MARGARET OGILVY 

" Just my apron." 

" Is that a book beneath the apron ? " 

" It might be a book." 

" Let me see." 

" Go away with you to your work." 

But I lifted the apron. "Why, it's 'The 
Master of Ballantrae ! ' " I exclaimed, shocked. 

" So it is ! " said my mother, equally surpriseo. 
But I looked sternly at her, and perhaps she 
blushed. 

" Well, what do you think : not nearly equal to 
mine ? " said I with humour. 

" Nothing like them," she said determinedly. 

"Not a bit," said I, though whether with a 
smile or a groan is immaterial ; they would have 
meant the same thing. Should I put the book 
back on its shelf? I asked, and she replied that I 
could put it wherever I liked, for all she cared, so 
long as I took it out of her sight (the implication 
was that it had stolen on to her lap while she was 
looking out at the window). My behaviour may 
seem small, but I gave her a last chance, for I said 
that some people found it a book there was no 
putting down until they reached the last page. 

" I'm no that kind," replied my mother. 

Nevertheless our old game with the haver of a 
thing, as she called it, was continued, with this 
difference, that it was now she who carried the 
book covertly upstairs, and I who replaced it on 

3 o8 



R. L. S. 

the shelf, and several times we caught each other 
in the act, but not a word said either of us; we 
were grown self-conscious. Much of the play 
no doubt I forget, but one incident I remember 
clearly. She had come down to sit beside me 
while I wrote, and sometimes, when I looked up, 
her eye was not on me, but on the shelf where 
" The Master of Ballantrae " stood inviting her. 
Mr. Stevenson's books are not for the shelf, they 
are for the hand ; even when you lay them down, 
let it be on the table for the next comer. Being 
the most sociable that man has penned in our 
time, they feel very lonely up there in a stately 
row. I think their eye is on you the moment 
you enter the room, and so you are drawn to look 
at them, and you take a volume down with the 
impulse that induces one to unchain the dog. 
And the result is not dissimilar, for in another 
moment you two are at play. Is there any other 
modern writer who gets round you in this way? 
Well, he had given my mother the look which 
in the ball-room means, "Ask me for this waltz," 
and she ettled to do it, but felt that her more duti- 
ful course was to sit out the dance with this other 
less entertaining partner. I wrote on doggedly, 
but could hear the whispering. 

" Am I to be a wall-flower ? " asked James 
Durie reproachfully. (It must have been leap- 
year.) 

3°9 



MARGARET OGILVY 

" Speak lower," replied my mother, with an un- 
easy look at me. 

" Pooh ! " said James contemptuously, " that 
kail-runtle ! " 

" I winna have him miscalled," said my mother, 
frowning. 

" I am done with him," said James (wiping his 
cane with his cambric handkerchief), and his 
sword clattered deliciously (I cannot think this 
was accidental), which made my mother sigh. 
Like the man he was, he followed up his ad- 
vantage with a comparison that made me dip 
viciously. 

"A prettier sound that," said he, clanking his 
sword again, "than the clack-clack of your young 
friend's shuttle." 

" Whist ! " cried my mother, who had seen me dip. 

" Then give me your arm," said James, lowering 
his voice. 

" I dare not," answered my mother. " He 's so 
touchy about you." 

" Come, come," he pressed her, " you are cer- 
tain to do it sooner or later, so why not now ? " 

" Wait till he has gone for his walk," said my 
mother; "and, forby that, I'm ower old to dance 
with you." 

" How old are you ? " he inquired. 

" You're gey an' pert ! " cried my mother. 

" Are you seventy ? " 

310 



R. L. S. 

" Off and on," she admitted. 

" Pooh," he said, " a mere girl ! " 

She replied instantly, " I 'm no to be catched 
with chaff; " but she smiled and rose, as if he 
had stretched out his hand and got her by the 
finger-tip. 

After that they whispered so low (which they 
could do as they were now much nearer each 
other) that I could catch only one remark. It 
came from James, and seems to show the tenor 
of their whisperings, for his words were, " Easily 
enough, if you slip me beneath your shawl." 

That is what she did, and furthermore she, left 
the room guiltily, muttering something about red- 
ding up the drawers. I suppose I smiled wanly 
to myself, or conscience must have been nibbling 
at my mother, for in less than five minutes she was 
back, carrying her accomplice openly, and she 
thrust him with positive viciousness into the place 
where my Stevenson had lost a tooth (as the writer 
whom he most resembled would have said). And 
then like a good mother she took up one of her 
son's books and read it most determinedly. It 
had become a touching incident to me, and I re- 
member how we there and then agreed upon a 
compromise : she was to read the enticing thing 
just to convince herself of its inferiority. 

" The Master of Ballantrae " is not the best. 
Conceive the glory, which was my mother's, of 

3 11 



MARGARET OGILVY 

knowing from a trustworthy source that there are 
at least three better awaiting you on the same shelf. 
She did not know Alan Breck yet, and he was as 
anxious to step down as Mr. Bally himself. John 
Silver was there, getting into his leg, so that she 
should not have to wait a moment, and roaring, 
" I'll lay to that ! " when she told me consolingly 
that she could not thole pirate stories. Not to 
know these gentlemen, what is it like? It is like 
never having been in love. But they are in the 
house ! That is like knowing that you will fall in 
love to-morrow morning. With one word, by 
drawing one mournful face, I could have got my 
mother to abjure the jam-shelf — nay, I might have 
managed it by merely saying that she had enjoyed 
" The Master of Ballantrae." For you must re- 
member that she only read it to persuade herself 
(and me) of its unworthiness, and that the reason 
she wanted to read the others was to get further 
proof. All this she made plain to me, eyeing me 
a little anxiously the while, and of course I accepted 
the explanation. Alan is the biggest child of them 
all, and I doubt not that she thought so, but 
curiously enough her views of him are among the 
things I have forgotten. But how enamoured she 
was of " Treasure Island," and how faithful she 
tried to be to me all the time she was reading it ! 
I had to put my hands over her eyes to let her 
know that I had entered the room, and even then 

312 



R. L. S. 

she might try to read between my fingers, coming 
to herself presently, however, to say " It's a haver 
of a book." 

" Those pirate stories are so uninteresting," I 
would reply without fear, for she was too engrossed 
to see through me. " Do you think you will 
finish this one ? " 

" I may as well go on with it since I have be- 
gun it," my mother says, so slily that my sister and 
I shake our heads at each other to imply, " Was 
there ever such a woman ! " 

" There are none of those one-legged scoundrels 
in my books," I say. 

" Better without them," she replies promptly. 

" I wonder, mother, what it is about the man 
that so infatuates the public ? " 

" He takes no hold of me," she insists. " I 
would a hantle rather read your books." 

I offer obligingly to bring one of them to her, 
and now she looks at me suspiciously. "You 
surely believe I like yours best," she says with in- 
stant anxiety, and I soothe her by assurances, and 
retire advising her to read on, just to see if she can 
find out how he misleads the public. " Oh, I may 
take a look at it again by and by," she says indif- 
ferently, but nevertheless the probability is that as 
the door shuts the book opens, as if by some me- 
chanical contrivance. I remember how she read 
16 Treasure Island," holding it close to the ribs of 

3*3 



MARGARET OGILVY 

the fire (because she could not spare a moment to 
rise and light the gas), and how, when bed-time 
came, and we coaxed, remonstrated, scolded, she 
said quite fiercely, clinging to the book, " I dinna 
lay my head on a pillow this night till I see how 
that laddie got out of the barrel." 

After this, I think, he was as bewitching as the 
laddie in the barrel to her — Was he not always a 
laddie in the barrel himself, climbing in for apples 
while we all stood around, like gamins, waiting 
for a bite ? He was the spirit of boyhood tugging 
at the skirts of this old world of ours and com- 
pelling it to come back and play. And I suppose 
my mother felt this, as so many have felt it : like 
others, she was a little scared at first to find herself 
skipping again, with this masterful child at the 
rope, but soon she gave him her hand and set off 
with him for the meadow, not an apology between 
the two of them for the author left behind. But 
never to the end did she admit (in words) that he 
had a way with him which was beyond her son. 
" Silk and sacking, that is what we are," she was 
informed, to which she would reply obstinately, 
" Well, then, I prefer sacking." 

"But if he had been your son? " 

" But he is not." 

" You wish he were ? " 

" I dinna deny but what I could have found 
room for him." 

3H 



R. L. S. 

And still at times she would smear him with 
the name of black (to his delight when he learned 
the reason). That was when some podgy red- 
sealed blue-crossed letter arrived from Vailima, 
inviting me to journey thither. (His directions 
were, " You take the boat at San Francisco, and 
then my place is the second to the left.") Even 
London seemed to her to carry me so far away 
that I often took a week to the journey (the first 
six days in getting her used to the idea), and these 
letters terrified her. It was not the finger of Jim 
Hawkins she now saw beckoning me across the 
seas, it was John Silver, waving a crutch. Seldom, 
I believe, did I read straight through one of these 
Vailima letters; when in the middle I suddenly 
remembered who was upstairs and what she was 
probably doing, and I ran to her, three steps at a 
jump, to find her, lips pursed, hands folded, a pic- 
ture of gloom. 

" 1 have a letter from " 

" So I have heard." 

" Would you like to hear it?" 

"No." 

" Can you not abide him ? " 

" I canna thole him." 

"Is he a black?" 

" He is all that." 

Well, Vailima was the one spot on earth I had 
any great craving to visit, but I think she always 

3*5 



MARGARET OGILVY 

knew I would never leave her. Sometime, she 
said, she should like me to go, but not until she 
was laid away. "And how small I have grown 
this last winter. Look at my wrists. It canna be 
long now." No, I never thought of going, was 
never absent for a day from her without reluc- 
tance, and never walked so quickly as when I was 
going back. In the meantime that happened 
which put an end for ever to my scheme of travel. 
I shall never go up the Road of Loving Hearts 
now, on "a wonderful clear night of stars," to 
meet the man coming toward me on a horse. It 
is still a wonderful clear night of stars, but the 
road is empty. So I never saw the dear king of 
us all. But before he had written books he was 
in my part of the country with a fishing wand in 
his hand, and I like to think that I was the boy 
who met him that day by Queen Margaret's burn, 
where the rowans are, and busked a fly for him, 
and stood watching, while his lithe figure rose and 
fell as he cast and hinted back from the crystal 
waters of Noran-side. 



316 



CHAPTER VIII 

A PANIC IN THE HOUSE 

I was sitting at my desk in London when a tele- 
gram came announcing that my mother was again 
dangerously ill, and I seized my hat and hur- 
ried to the station. It is not a memory of one 
night only. A score of times, I am sure, I was 
called north thus suddenly, and reached our little 
town trembling, head out at railway-carriage win- 
dow for a glance at a known face which would 
answer the question on mine. These illnesses 
came as regularly as the back-end of the year, but 
were less regular in going, and through them all, 
by night and by day, I see my sister moving so 
unwearyingly, so lovingly, though with failing 
strength, that I bow my head in reverence for her. 
She was wearing herself done. The doctor ad- 
vised us to engage a nurse, but the mere word 
frightened my mother, and we got between her 
and the door, as if the woman was already on the 
stair. To have a strange woman in my mother's 
room — you who are used to them cannot con- 
ceive what it meant to us. 

3*7 



MARGARET OGILVY 

Then we must have a servant. This seemed 
only less horrible. My father turned up his sleeves 
and clutched the besom. I tossed aside my pa- 
pers, and was ready to run the errands. He 
answered the door, I kept the fires going, he gave 
me a lesson in cooking, I showed him how to 
make beds, one of us wore an apron. It was not 
for long. I was led to my desk, the newspaper 
was put into my father's hand. " But a servant ! " 
we cried, and would have fallen to again. "No 
servant comes into this house," said my sister 
quite fiercely, and, oh, but my mother was relieved 
to hear her. There were many such scenes, a 
year of them, I daresay, before we yielded. 

I cannot say which of us felt it most. In Lon- 
don I was used to servants, and in moments of ir- 
ritation would ring for them furiously, though 
doubtless my manner changed as they opened the 
door. I have even held my own with gentlemen 
in plush, giving one my hat, another my stick, 
and a third my coat, and all done with little more 
trouble than I should have expended in putting 
the three articles on the chair myself. But this 
bold deed, and other big things of the kind, I did 
that I might tell my mother of them afterwards, 
while I sat on the end of her bed, and her face 
beamed with astonishment and mirth. 

From my earliest days I had seen servants. 
The manse had a servant, the bank had another; 

318 



A PANIC IN THE HOUSE 

one of their uses was to pounce upon, and carry 
away in stately manner, certain naughty boys who 
played with me. The banker did not seem really 
great to me, but his servant — oh, yes. Her boots 
cheeped all the way down the church aisle; it was 
common report that she had flesh every day for 
her dinner; instead of meeting her lover at the 
pump, she walked him into the country, and he 
returned with wild roses in his buttonhole, his 
hand up to hide them, and on his face the troubled 
look of those who know that if they take this lady 
they must give up drinking from the saucer for 
evermore. For the lovers were really common 
men until she gave them that glance over the 
shoulder which, I have noticed, is the fatal gift 
of servants. 

According to legend we once had a servant — 
in my childhood I could show the mark of it on 
my forehead, and even point her out to other 
boys, though she was now merely a wife with a 
house of her own. But even while I boasted I 
doubted. Reduced to life-size she may have been 
but a woman who came in to help. I shall say 
no more about her lest some one comes forward 
to prove that she went home at night. 

Never shall I forget my first servant. I was 
eight or nine, in velveteen, diamond socks ("Cross 
your legs when they look at you," my mother had 
said, "and put your thumb in your pocket and 

3 ] 9 



MARGARET OGILVY 

leave the top of your handkerchief showing"), 
and I had travelled by rail to visit a relative. He 
had a servant, and as I was to be his guest she 
must be my servant also for the time being — you 
may be sure I had got my mother to put this 
plainly before me ere I set off. My relative met 
me at the station, but I wasted no time in hoping 
I found him well. I did not even cross my legs 
for him, so eager was I to hear whether she was 
still there. A sister greeted me at the door, but I 
chafed at having to be kissed ; at once I made for 
the kitchen, where, I knew 5 they reside, and there 
she was, and I crossed my legs and put one thumb 
in my pocket, and the handkerchief was showing. 
Afterwards I stopped strangers on the highway 
with an offer to show her to them through the 
kitchen window, and I doubt not the first letter I 
ever wrote told my mother what they are like 
when they are so near that you can put your 
fingers into them. 

But now when we could have servants for our- 
selves I shrank from the thought. It would not 
be the same house; we should have to dissem- 
ble ; I saw myself speaking English the long day 
through. You only know the shell of a Scot un- 
til you have entered his home circle ; in his office, 
in clubs, at social gatherings where you and he 
seem to be getting on so well he is really a house 
with all the shutters closed and the door locked. 

320 



A PANIC IN THE HOUSE 

He is not opaque of set purpose, often it is 
against his will — it is certainly against mine, I 
try to keep my shutters open and my foot in the 
door, but they will bang to. In many ways my 
mother was as reticent as myself, though her man- 
ners were as gracious as mine were rough (in vain, 
alas, all the honest oiling of them), and my sister 
was the most reserved of us all; you might at times 
see a light through one of my chinks : she was 
double-shuttered. Now, it seems to be a law of 
nature that we must show our true selves at some 
time, and as the Scot must do it at home, and 
squeeze a day into an hour, what follows is that 
there he is self-revealing in the superlative degree, 
the feelings so long dammed up overflow, and thus 
a Scotch family are probably better acquainted 
with each other, and more ignorant of the life 
outside their circle, than any other family in the 
world. And as knowledge is sympathy, the affec- 
tion existing between them is almost painful in its 
intensity; they have not more to give than their 
neighbours, but it is bestowed upon a few instead 
of being distributed among many; they are re- 
puted niggardly, but for family affection at least 
they pay in gold. In this, I believe, we shall find 
the true explanation why Scotch literature, since 
long before the days of Burns, has been so often 
inspired by the domestic hearth and has treated 
it with a passionate understanding. 

321 



MARGARET OGILVY 

Must a woman come into our house and dis- 
cover that I was not such a dreary dog as I had 
the reputation of being*? Was I to be seen at 
last with the veil of dourness lifted ? My com- 
pany voice is so low and unimpressive that my 
first remark is merely an intimation that I am 
about to speak (like the whirr of the clock before 
it strikes) : must it be revealed that I had another 
voice, that there was one door I never opened 
without leaving my reserve on the mat? Ah, 
that room, must its secrets be disclosed? So 
joyous they were when my mother was well, no 
wonder we were merry. Again and again she had 
been given back to us ; it was for the glorious to- 
day we thanked God ; in our hearts we knew and 
in our prayers confessed that the fill of delight had 
been given us, whatever might befall. We had 
not to wait till all was over to know its value; 
my mother used to say, " We never understand 
how little we need in this world until we know the 
loss of it," and there can be few truer sayings, but 
during her last years we exulted daily in the pos- 
session of her as much as we can exult in her 
memory. No wonder, I say, that we were merry 
but we liked to show it to God alone, and to Him 
only our agony during those many night-alarms, 
when lights flickered in the house and white faces 
were round my mother's bedside. Not for other 
eyes those long vigils when, night about, v/e sat 

322 



A PANIC IN THE HOUSE 

watching, nor the awful nights when we stood 
together, teeth clenched — waiting — it must be 
now. And it was not then; her hand became 
cooler, her breathing more easy ; she smiled to us. 
Once more I could work by snatches, and was 
glad, but what was the result to me compared to 
the joy of hearing that voice from the other room ? 
There lay all the work I was ever proud of, the 
rest is but honest craftsmanship done to give her 
coal and food and softer pillows. My thousand 
letters that she so carefully preserved, always sleep- 
ing with the last beneath the sheet, where one was 
found when she died — they are the only writing 
of mine of which I shall ever boast. I would not 
there had been one less though I could have writ- 
ten an immortal book for it. 

How my sister toiled — to prevent a stranger's 
getting auy footing in the house ! And how, with 
the same object, my mother strove to " do for her- 
self" once more. She pretended that she was 
always well now, and concealed her ailments so 
craftily that we had to probe for them : 

" I think you are not feeling well to-day ? " 

" I am perfectly well." 

" Where is the pain ? " 

" I have no pain to speak of." 

" Is it at your heart ? " 

"No." 

" Is your breathing hurting you ? " 

3*3 



MARGARET OGILVY 

" Not it." 

" Do you feel those stounds in your head again?" 

" No, no, I tell you there is nothing the matter 
with me." 

" Have you a pain in your side ? " 

" Really, it's most provoking I canna put my 
hand to my side without your thinking I have a 
pain there." 

" You have a pain in your side ! " 

" I might have a pain in my side." 

"And you are trying to hide it! Is it very 
painful ? " 

" It's — it's no so bad but what I can bear it." 

Which of these two gave in first I cannot tell, 
though to me fell the duty of persuading them, 
for whichever she was she rebelled as soon as the 
other showed signs of yielding, so that sometimes 
I had two converts in the week, but never both on 
the same day. I would take them separately, and 
press the one to yield for the sake of the other, 
but they saw so easily through my artifice. My 
mother might go bravely to my sister and say, 
"I have been thinking it over, and I believe I 
would like a servant fine — once we got used to 
her." 

" Did he tell you to say that ? " asks my sister 
sharply. 

" I say it of my own free will." 

" He put you up to it, I am sure, and he told 

3 2 4 



A PANIC IN THE HOUSE 

you not to let on that you did it to lighten my 
work." 

" Maybe he did, but I think we should get one." 
"Not for my sake," says my sister obstinately, 
and then my mother comes ben to me to say de- 
lightedly, " She winna listen to reason ! " 

But at last a servant was engaged ; we might be 
said to be at the window, gloomily waiting for her 
now, and it was with such words as these that we 
sought to comfort each other and ourselves : 
" She will go early to her bed." 
" She needna often be seen upstairs." 
" We'll set her to the walking every day." 
" There will be a many errands for her to run. 
We'll tell her to take her time over them." 

" Three times she shall go to the kirk every 
Sabbath, and we'll egg her on to attending the lec- 
tures in the hall." 

" She is sure to have friends in the town. We'll 
let her visit them often." 

" If she dares to come into your room, mother ! " 
" Mind this, every one of you, servant or no 
servant, I fold all the linen mysel." 

" She shall not get cleaning out the east room." 
"Nor putting my chest of drawers in order." 
" Nor tidying up my manuscripts." 
" I hope she's a reader, though. You could set 
her down with a book, and then close the door 
canny on her." 



MARGARET OGILVY 

And so on. Was ever servant awaited so ap- 
prehensively? And then she came, — at an anxious 
time, too, when her worth could be put to the 
proof at once, — and from first to last she was a 
treasure. I know not what we should have done 
without her. 



CHAPTER IX 

MY HEROINE 

When it was known that I had begun another 
story my mother might ask what it was to be 
about this time. 

" Fine we can guess who it is about," my sister 
would say pointedly. 

" Maybe you can guess, but it is beyond me," 
says my mother, with the meekness of one who 
knows that she is a dull person. 

My sister scorned her at such times. " What 
woman is in all his books ? " she would demand. 

'* I'm sure I canna say," replies my mother de- 
terminedly. " I thought the women were different 
every time." 

"Mother, I wonder you can be so audacious! 
Fine you know what woman I mean." 

"How can I know? What woman is it? You 
should bear in mind that I hinna your cleverness " 
(they were constantly giving each other little 
knocks). 

" I won't give you the satisfaction of saying her 
name. But this I will say, it is high time he was 
keeping her out of his books." 

3 2 7 



MARGARET OGILVY 

And then as usual my mother would give her- 
self away unconsciously. " That is what I tell 
him," she says, chuckling, " and he tries to keep 
me out, but he canna; it's more than he can do!" 

On an evening after my mother had gone to 
bed, the first chapter would be brought upstairs, 
and I read, sitting at the foot of the bed, while 
my sister watched to make my mother behave 
herself, and my father cried H'sh ! when there 
were interruptions. All would go well at the 
start, the reflections were accepted with a little 
nod of the head, the descriptions of scenery as ruts 
on the road that must be got over at a walking 
pace (my mother did not care for scenery, and 
that is why there is so little of it in my books). 
But now I am reading too quickly, a little appre- 
hensively, because I know that the next paragraph 
begins with — let us say with, " Along this path 
came a woman " : I had intended to rush on here 
in a loud bullying voice, but "Along this path 
came a woman " I read, and stop. Did I hear a 
faint sound from the other end of the bed ? Per- 
haps I did not ; I may only have been listening 
for it, but I falter and look up. My sister and I 
look sternly at my mother. She bites her under- 
lip and clutches the bed with both hands, really 
she is doing her best for me, but first comes a 
smothered gurgling sound, then her hold on her- 
self relaxes and she shakes with mirth. 

328 



MY HEROINE 

" That's a way to behave !" cries my sister. 

" I cannot help it," my mother gasps. 

" And there's nothing to laugh at." 

" It's that woman," my mother explains unne- 
cessarily. 

"Maybe she's not the woman you think her," 
I say, crushed. 

"Maybe not," says my mother doubtfully. 
" What was her name % " 

" Her name," I answer with triumph, " was not 
Margaret ; " but this makes her ripple again. " I 
have so many names nowadays," she mutters. 

" H'sh ! " says my father, and the reading is 
resumed. 

Perhaps the woman who came along the path 
was of tall and majestic figure, which should have 
shown my mother that I had contrived to start my 
train without her this time. But it did not. 

" What are you laughing at now ? " says my 
sister severely. " Do you not hear that she was a 
tall, majestic woman ? " 

" It's the first time I ever heard it said of her," 
replies my mother. 

" But she is." 

" Ke fy, havers ! " 

" The book says it." 

" There will be a many queer things in the 
book. What was she wearing ? " 

I have not described her clothes. " That's a 

3 2 9 



MARGARET OGILVY 

mistake," says my mother. " When I come up- 
on a woman in a book, the first thing I want to 
know about her is whether she was good-looking, 
and the second, how she was put on." 

The woman on the path was eighteen years of 
age, and of remarkable beauty. 

" That settles you," says my sister. 

" I was no beauty at eighteen," my mother ad- 
mits, but here my father interferes unexpectedly. 
" There wasna your like in this countryside at 
eighteen," says he stoutly. 

" Pooh ! " says she, well pleased. 

" Were you plain, then ? " we ask. 

" Sal," she replies briskly, " I was far from plain." 

" H'sh ! " 

Perhaps in the next chapter this lady (or another) 
appears in a carriage. 

" I assure you we're mounting in the world," I 
hear my mother murmur, but I hurry on without 
looking up. The lady lives in a house where 
there are footmen — but the footmen have come 
on the scene too hurriedly. " This is more than 
I can stand," gasps my mother, and just as she is 
getting the better of a fit of laughter, " Footman, 
give me a drink of water," she cries, and this sets 
her off again. Often the readings had to end ab- 
ruptly because her mirth brought on violent fits 
of coughing. 

Sometimes I read to my sister alone, and she 

330 



MY HEROINE 

assured me that she could not see my mother 
among the women this time. This she said to 
humour me. Presently she would slip upstairs to 
announce triumphantly, " You are in again! " 

Or in the small hours I might make a confidant 
of my father, and when I had finished reading he 
would say thoughtfully, " That lassie is very 
natural. Some of the ways you say she had — 
your mother had them just the same. Did you 
ever notice what an extraordinary woman your 
mother is ? " 

Then would I seek my mother for comfort. 
She was the more ready to give it because of her 
profound conviction that if I was found out — 
that is, if readers discovered how frequently and in 
how many guises she appeared in my books — 
the affair would become a public scandal 

" You see Jess is not really you," I begin in- 
quiringly. 

"Oh, no, she is another kind of woman alto- 
gether," my mother says, and then spoils the com- 
pliment by adding naively, " She had but two 
rooms and I have six." 

I sigh. " Without counting the pantry, and 
it's a great big pantry," she mutters. 

This was not the sort of difference I could 
greatly plume myself upon, and honesty would 
force me to say, " As far as that goes, there was a 
time when you had but two rooms yourself " 

33* 



MARGARET OGILVY 

" That's long since," she breaks in. " I began 
with an up-the-stair, but I always had it in my 
mind — I never mentioned it, but there it was — 
to have the down-the-stair as well. Ay, and I've 
had it this many a year." 

" Still, there is no denying that Jess had the 
same ambition." 

" She had, but to her. two-roomed house she had 
to stick all her born days. Was that like me ? " 

"No, but she wanted " 

" She wanted, and I wanted, but I got and she 
didna. That's the difference betwixt her and me." 

" If that is all the difference, it is little credit I 
can claim for having created her." 

My mother sees that I need soothing. " That 
is far from being all the difference," she would say 
eagerly. " There's my silk, for instance. Though 
I say it mysel, there's not a better silk in the valley 
of Strathmore. Had Jess a silk of any kind — 
not to speak of a silk like that ? " 

" Well, she had no silk, but you remember how 
she got that cloak with beads." 

"An eleven and a bit! Hoots, what was that 
to boast of! I tell you, every single yard of my 
silk cost " 

" Mother, that is the very way Jess spoke about 
her cloak ! " 

She lets this pass, perhaps without hearing it, 
for solicitude about her silk has hurried her to the 
wardrobe where it hangs. 

33 2 



MY HEROINE 

"Ah, mother, I am afraid that was very like 
Jess ! " 

" How could it be like her when she didna even 
have a wardrobe ? I tell you what, if there had 
been a real Jess and she had boasted to me about 
her cloak with beads, I would have said to her in 
a careless sort of voice, ' Step across with me, 
Jess, and I'll let you see something that is hang- 
ing in my wardrobe.' That would have lowered 
her pride ! " 

" I don't believe that is what you would have 
done, mother." 

Then a sweeter expression would come into her 
face. " No," she would say reflectively, " it's not." 

" What would you have done ? I think I 
know." 

" You canna know. But I'm thinking I would 
have called to mind that she was a poor woman, 
and ailing, and terrible windy about her cloak, 
and I would just have said it was a beauty and 
that I wished I had one like it." 

" Yes, I am certain that is what you would have 
done. But oh, mother, that is just how Jess would 
have acted if some poorer woman than she had 
shown her a new shawl." 

" Maybe, but though I hadna boasted about my 
silk I would have wanted to do it." 

" Just as Jess would have been fidgeting to show 
off her eleven and a bit ! " 

It seems advisable to jump to another book; 

333 



MARGARET OGILVY 

not to my first, because — well, as it was my first, 
there would naturally be something of my mother 
in it, and not to the second, as it was my first 
novel and not much esteemed even in our family. 
(But the little touches of my mother in it are not 
so bad.) Let us try the story about the minister. 

My mother's first remark is decidedly damp- 
ing. " Many a time in my young days," she says, 
" 1 played about the Auld Licht manse, but I lit- 
tle thought I should live to be the mistress of it ! " 

" But Margaret is not you." 

" N — no, oh no. She had a very different life 
from mine. I never let on to a soul that she 
is me 1 " 

" She was not meant to be you when I began. 
Mother, what a way you have of coming creep- 
ing in ! " 

" You should keep better watch on yourself." 

" Perhaps if I had called Margaret by some 
other name " 

" I should have seen through her just the same. 
As soon as I heard she was the mother I began to 
laugh. In some ways, though, she's no so very 
like me. She was long in finding out about Bab- 
bie. Pse uphaud I should have been quicker." 

"Babbie, you see, kept close to the garden wall." 

" It's not the wall up at the manse that would 
have hidden her from me." 

" She came out in the dark." 

334 



MY HEROINE 

" I'm thinking she would have found me look- 
ing for her with a candle." 

"And Gavin was secretive." 

66 That would have put me on my mettle." 

" She never suspected anything." 

" I wonder at her." 

But my new heroine is to be a child. What 
has madam to say to that ? 

A child ! Yes, she has something to say even 
to that. " This beats all ! " are the words. 

"Come, come, mother, I see what you are 
thinking, but I assure you that this time " 

" Of course not," she said soothingly, " oh, no, 
she canna be me;" but anon her real thoughts are 
revealed by the artless remark, " I doubt, though, 
this is a tough job you have on hand — it is so 
long since I was a bairn." 

We came very close to each other in those 
talks. " It is a queer thing," she would say softly, 
" that near everything you write is about this bit 
place. You little expected that when you began. 
I mind well the time when it never entered your 
head, any more than mine, that you could write a 
page about our squares and wynds. I wonder 
how it has come about ? " 

There was a time when I could not have an- 
swered that question, but that time had long 
passed. " I suppose, mother, it was because you 
were most at home in your own town, and there 

335 



MARGARET OGILVY 

was never much pleasure to me in writing of peo- 
ple who could not have known you, nor of squares 
and wynds you never passed through, nor of a 
countryside where you never carried your father's 
dinner in a flaggon. There is scarce a house in 
all my books where I have not seemed to see you 
a thousand times, bending over the fireplace or 
winding up the clock." 

" And yet you used to be in such a quandary 
because you knew nobody you could make your 
women-folk out of! Do you mind that, and how 
we both laughed at the notion of your having to 
make them out of me ? " 

" I remember." 

"And now you've gone back to my father's 
time. It's more than sixty years since I carried 
his dinner in a flaggon through the long parks of 
Kinnordy." 

" I often go into the long parks, mother, and sit 
on the stile at the edge of the wood till I fancy I 
see a little girl coming toward me with a flaggon 
in her hand." 

"Jumping the burn (I was once so proud of 
my jumps !) and swinging the flaggon round so 
quick that what was inside hadna time to fall out. 
I used to wear a magenta frock and a white pina- 
fore. Did I ever tell you that ? " 

"Mother, the little girl in my story wears a 
magenta frock and a white pinafore." 

33 6 



MY HEROINE 

w You minded that ! But I'm thinking it wasna 
a lassie in a pinafore you saw in the long parks of 
Kinnordy, it was just a gey done auld woman." 

" It was a lassie in a pinafore, mother, when she 
was far away, but when she came near it was a 
gey done auld woman." 

" And a fell ugly one ! " 

" The most beautiful one I shall ever see." 

"I wonder to hear you say it. Look at my 
wrinkled auld face." 

" It is the sweetest face in all the world." 

" See how the rings drop off my poor wasted 
finger." 

" There will always be some one nigh, mother, 
to put them on again." 

" Ay, will there ! Well I know it. Do you 
mind how when you were but a bairn you used 
to say, ' Wait till I'm a man, and you'll never 
have a reason for greeting again ? ' " 

I remembered. 

" You used to come running into the house to 
say, ' There's a proud dame going down the Mary- 
wellbrae in a cloak that is black on one side and 
white on the other ; wait till I'm a man, and you'll 
have one the very same.' And when I lay on 
gey hard beds you said, ' When I'm a man you'll 
lie on feathers.' You saw nothing bonny, you 
never heard of my setting my heart on anything, 
but what you flung up your head and cried, 

337 



MARGARET OGILVY 

'Walt till I'm a man.' You fair shamed me 
before the neighbours, and yet I was windy, too. 
And now it has all come true like a dream. I can 
call to mind not one little thing I ettled for in my 
lusty days that hasna been put into my hands in 
my auld age; I sit here useless, surrounded by 
the gratification of all my wishes and all my am- 
bitions, and at times I'm near terrified, for it's as 
if God had mistaken me for some other woman." 

" Your hopes and ambitions were so simple," I 
would say, but she did not like that. " They 
werena that simple/' she would answer, flushing. 

I am reluctant to leave those happy days, but 
the end must be faced, and as I write I seem to 
see my mother growing smaller and her face more 
wistful, and still she lingers with us, as if God had 
said, "Child of mine, your time has come, be not 
afraid," and she was not afraid, but still she lin- 
gered, and He waited, smiling. I never read any 
of that last book to her ; when it was finished she 
was too heavy with years to follow a story. To 
me this was as if my book must go out cold into 
the world (like all that may come after it from 
me), and my sister, who took more thought for 
others and less for herself than any other human 
being I have known, saw this, and by some means 
unfathomable to a man coaxed my mother into 
being once again the woman she had been. On 
a day but three weeks before she died my father 

338 



MY HEROINE 

and I were called softly upstairs. My mother was 
sitting bolt upright, as she loved to sit, in her old 
chair by the window, with a manuscript in her 
hands. But she was looking about her without 
much understanding. " Just to please him," my 
sister whispered, and then in a low, trembling 
voice my mother began to read. I looked at my 
sister. Tears of woe were stealing down her face. 
Soon the reading became very slow and stopped. 
After a pause, " There was something you were 
to say to him," my sister reminded her. "Luck," 
muttered a voice as from the dead, " luck." And 
then the old smile came running to her face like 
a lamp-lighter, and she said to me, " I am ower 
far gone to read, but I'm thinking I am in it 
again!" My father put her Testament in her 
hands, and it fell open — as it always does — at 
the Fourteenth of John. She made an effort to 
read, but could not. Suddenly she stooped and 
kissed the broad page. " Will that do instead ? " 
she asked. 



339 



CHAPTER X 

ART THOU AFRAID HIS POWER SHALL FAIL? 

For years I had been trying to prepare myself 
for my mother's death, trying to foresee how she 
would die, seeing myself when she was dead. 
Even then I knew it was a vain thing I did, but I 
am sure there was no morbidness in it. I hoped 
I should be with her at the end, not as the one she 
looked at last, but as him from whom she would 
turn only to look upon her best-beloved, not my 
arm but my sister's should be round her when she 
died, not my hand but my sister's should close her 
eyes. I knew that I might reach her too late ; I 
saw myself open a door where there was none to 
greet me, and go up the old stair into the old 
room. But what I did not foresee was that which 
happened. I little thought it could come about 
that I should climb the old stair, and pass the 
door beyond which my mother lay dead, and enter 
another room first, and go on my knees there. 

My mother's favourite paraphrase is one known 
in our house as David's because it was the last he 

,340 



ART THOU AFRAID? 

learned to repeat. It was also the last thing she 
read — 

Art thou afraid his power shall fai! 

When comes thy evil day? 
And can an all-creating arm 

Grow weary or decay? 

I heard her voice gain strength as she read it, 
I saw her timid face take courage, but when came 
my evil day, then at the dawning, alas for me, I 
was afraid. 

In those last weeks, though we did not know it, 
my sister was dying on her feet. For many years 
she had been giving her life, a little bit at a time, 
for another year, another month, latterly for another 
day, of her mother, and now she was worn out. 
"I'll never leave you, mother." — "Fine I know 
you'll never leave me." I thought that cry so pa- 
thetic at the time, but I was not to know its full 
significance until it was only the echo of a cry. 
Looking at these two, then, it was to me as if my 
mother had set out for the new country, and my 
sister held her back. But I see with a clearer 
vision now. It is no longer the mother but the 
daughter who is in front, and she cries, " Mother, 
you are lingering so long at the end, I have ill 
waiting for you." 

But she knew no more than we how it was to 
be ; if she seemed weary when we met her on the 
stair, she was still the brightest, the most active 

34 1 



MARGARET OGILVY 

figure in my mother's room ; she never com- 
plained, save when she had to depart on that walk 
which separated them for half an hour. How re- 
luctantly she put on her bonnet, how we had to 
press her to it, and how often, having gone as far 
as the door, she came back to stand by my mother's 
side. Sometimes, as we watched from the window, 
I could not but laugh, and yet with a pain at my 
heart, to see her hasting doggedly onward, not an 
eye for right or left, nothing in her head but the 
return. There was always my father in the house, 
than whom never was a more devoted husband, 
and often there were others, one daughter in par- 
ticular, but they scarce dared tend my mother — 
this one snatched the cup jealously from their 
hands. My mother liked it best from her. We 
all knew this. " I like them fine, but I canna do 
without you." My sister, so unselfish in all other 
things, had an unwearying passion for parading it 
before us. It was the rich reward of her life. 

The others spoke among themselves of what 
must come soon, and they had tears to help them, 
but this daughter would not speak of it, and her 
tears were ever slow to come. I knew that night 
and day she was trying to get ready for a world 
without her mother in it, but she must remain 
dumb, none of us was so Scotch as she, she must 
bear her agony alone — a tragic, solitary Scotch- 
woman. Even my mother, who spoke so calmly to 

342 



ART THOU AFRAID? 

us of the coming time, could not mention it to her. 
These two, the one in bed, and the other bending 
over her, could only look long at each other, un- 
til slowly the tears came to my sister's eyes, and 
then my mother would turn away her wet face. And 
still neither said a word, each knew so well what 
was in the other's thoughts, so eloquently they 
spoke in silence, " Mother, I am loath to let you 
go, and " Oh, my daughter, now that my time is 
near, I wish you werena quite so fond of me." 
But when the daughter had slipped away my mother 
would grip my hand and cry, " I leave her to you; 
you see how she has sown, it will depend on you 
how she is to reap." And I made promises, but 
I suppose neither of us saw that she had already 
reaped. 

In the night my mother might waken and sit 
up in bed, confused by what she saw. While she 
slept, six decades or more had rolled back and she 
was again in her girlhood; suddenly recalled from it 
she was dizzy, as with the rush of the years. How 
had she come into this room ? When she went to 
bed last night, after preparing her father's supper, 
there had been a dresser at the window: what had 
become of the salt-bucket, the meal-tub, the hams 
that should be hanging from the rafters ? There 
were no rafters; it was a papered ceiling. She 
had often heard of open beds, but how came she 
to be lying in one ? To fathom these things she 

343 



MARGARET OGILVY 

would try to spring out of bed, and be startled to 
find it a labour, as if she had been taken ill in the 
night. Hearing her move I might knock on the 
wall that separated us, this being a sign, prearranged 
between us, that I was near by, and so all was well, 
but sometimes the knocking seemed to belong to 
the past, and she would cry, " That is my father 
chapping at the door, I maun rise and let him in." 
She seemed to see him — and it was one much 
younger than herself that she saw — covered with 
snow, kicking clods of it from his boots, his hands 
swollen and chapped with sand and wet. Then I 
would hear — it was a common experience of the 
night — my sister soothing her lovingly, and turn- 
ing up the light to show her where she was, help- 
ing her to the window to let her see that it was no 
night of snow, even humouring her by going 
downstairs, and opening the outer door, and call- 
ing into the darkness, " Is anybody there ? " and 
if that was not sufficient, she would swaddle my 
mother in wraps and take her through the rooms 
of the house, lighting them one by one, pointing 
out familiar objects, and so guiding her slowly 
through the sixty odd years she had jumped too 
quickly. And perhaps the end of it was that my 
mother came to my bedside and said wistfully, 
" Am I an auld woman ? " 

Rut with daylight, even during the last week in 
which I saw her, she would be up and doing, for 

344 



ART THOU AFRAID? 

though pitifully frail she no longer suffered from 
any ailment. She seemed so well comparatively 
that I, having still the remnants of an illness to 
shake off, was to take a holiday in Switzerland, 
and then return for her, when we were all to go to 
the much-loved manse of her much-loved brother 
in the west country. So she had many prepara- 
tions on her mind, and the morning was the time 
when she had any strength to carry them out. To 
leave her house had always been a month's work 
for her, it must be left in such perfect order, every 
corner visited and cleaned out, every chest probed 
to the bottom, the linen lifted out, examined and 
put back lovingly as if to make it lie more easily 
in her absence, shelves had to be repapered, a 
strenuous week devoted to the garret. Less ex- 
haustively, but with much of the old exultation in 
her house, this was done for the last time, and then 
there was the bringing out of her own clothes, 
and the spreading of them upon the bed and the 
pleased fingering of them, and the consultations 
about which should be left behind. Ah, beautiful 
dream! I clung to it every morning; I would not 
look when my sister shook her head at it, but long 
before each day was done, I too knew that it could 
never be. It had come true many times, but never 
again. We two knew it, but when my mother, 
who must always be prepared so long beforehand, 
called for her trunk and band-boxes we brought 

34J 



MARGARET OGILVY 

them to her, and we stood silent, watching, while 
she packed. 

The morning came when I was to go away. It 
had come a hundred times, when I was a boy, 
when I was an undergraduate, when I was a man, 
when she had seemed big and strong to me, when 
she was grown so little and it was I who put my 
arms round her. But always it was the same 
scene. I am not to write about it, of the parting 
and the turning back on the stair, and two people 
trying to smile, and the setting off again, and the 
cry that brought me back. Nor shall I say more 
of the silent figure in the background, always in 
the background, always near my mother. The 
last I saw of these two was from the gate. They 
were at the window which never passes from my 
eyes. I could not see my dear sister's face, for 
she was bending over my mother, pointing me 
out to her, and telling her to wave her hand and 
smile, because I liked it so. That action was an 
epitome of my sister's life. 

I had been gone a fortnight when the telegram 
was put into my hands. I had got a letter from 
my sister, a few hours before, saying that all was 
well at home. The telegram said in five words 
that she had died suddenly the previous night. 
There was no mention of my mother, and I was 
three days' journey from home. 

The news I got on reaching London was this: 

34 6 



ART THOU AFRAID? 

my mother did not understand that her daughtei 
was dead, and they were waiting for me to tell 
her. 

I need not have been such a coward. This is 
how these two died — for, after all, I was too late 
by twelve hours to see my mother alive. 

Their last night was almost gleeful. In the old 
days that hour before my mother's gas was lowered 
had so often been the happiest that my pen steals 
back to it again and again as I write : it was the 
time when my mother lay smiling in bed and we 
were gathered round her like children at play, our 
reticence scattered on the floor or tossed in sport 
from hand to hand, the author become so boister- 
ous that in the pauses they were holding him in 
check by force. Rather woful had been some 
attempts latterly to renew those evenings, when 
my mother might be brought to the verge of them, 
as if some familiar echo called her, but where she 
was she did not clearly know, because the past 
was roaring in her ears like a great sea. But this 
night was the last gift to my sister. The joyous- 
ness of their voices drew the others in the house 
upstairs, where for more than an hour my mother 
was the center of a merry party and so clear of 
mental eye that they, who were at first cautious, 
abandoned themselves to the sport, and whatever 
they said, by way of humourous rally, she instantly 

347 



MARGARET OGILVY 

capped as of old, turning their darts against them- 
selves until in self-defence they were three to one, 
and the three hard pressed. How my sister must 
have been rejoicing ! Once again she could cry, 
" Was there ever such a woman ! " They tell me 
that such a happiness was on the daughter's face 
that my mother commented on it, that having 
risen to go they sat down again, fascinated by the 
radiance of these two. And when eventually they 
went, the last words they heard were, " They are 
gone, you see, mother, but I am here, I will never 
leave you," and " Na, you winna leave me ; fine I 
know that." For some time afterwards their voices 
could be heard from downstairs, but what they 
talked of is not known. And then came silence. 
Had I been at home I should have been in the 
room again several times, turning the handle of the 
door softly, releasing it so that it did not creak, and 
standing looking at them. It had been so a thou* 
sand times. But that night, would I have slipped 
out again, mind at rest, or should I have seen the 
change coming while they slept ? 

Let it be told in the fewest words. My sister 
awoke next morning with a headache. She had 
always been a martyr to headaches, but this one,, 
like many another, seemed to be unusually severe. 
Nevertheless she rose and lit my mother's fire and 
brought up her breakfast, and then had to return 
to bed. She was not able to write her daily letter 

348 



ART THOU AFRAID? 

to me, saying how my mother was, and almost the 
last thing she did was to ask my father to write it„ 
and not to let on that she was ill, as it would dis- 
tress me. The doctor was called, but she rapidly 
became unconscious. In this state she was re- 
moved from my mother's bed to another. It was 
discovered that she was suffering from an internal 
disease. No one had guessed it. She herself 
never knew. Nothing could be done. In this 
unconsciousness she passed away, without know- 
ing that she was leaving her mother. Had I 
known, when I heard of her death, that she had 
been saved that pain, surely I could have gone 
home more bravely with the words, 

Art thou afraid his power shall fail 
When comes thy evil day ? 

Ah, you would think so, I should have thought 
so, but I know myself now. When I reached 
London I did hear how my sister died, but still I 
was afraid. I saw myself in my mother's room 
telling her why the door of the next room was 
locked, and I was afraid. God had done so much, 
and yet I could not look confidently to Him for 
the little that was left to do. "O ye of little faith! " 
These are the words I seem to hear my mother 
saying to me now, and she looks at me so sor- 
rowfully. 

He did it very easily, and it has ceased to seem 

349 



MARGARET OGILVY 

marvellous to me because it was so plainly His 
doing. My timid mother saw the one who was 
never to leave her carried unconscious from the 
room, and she did not break down. She who used 
to wring her hands if her daughter was gone for 
a moment never asked for her again, they were 
afraid to mention her name; an awe fell upon 
them. But I am sure they need not have been so 
anxious. There are mysteries in life and death, 
but this was not one of them. A child can under- 
stand what happened. God said that my sister 
must come first, but He put His hand on my 
mother's eyes at that moment and she was altered. 

They told her that I was on my way home, and 
she said with a confident smile, " He will come as 
quick as trains can bring him." That is my re- 
ward, that is what I have got for my books. Every- 
thing I could do for her in this life I have done 
since I was a boy; I look back through the years 
and I cannot see the smallest thing left undone. 

They were buried together on my mother's 
seventy-sixth birthday, though there had been 
three days between their deaths. On the last day, 
my mother insisted on rising from bed and going 
through the house. The arms that had so often 
helped her on that journey were now cold in death, 
but there were others only less loving, and she 
went slowly from room to room like one bidding 
good-bye, and in mine she said, " The beautiful 

350 



ART THOU AFRAID? 

rows upon rows of books, and he said every one 
of them was mine, all mine ! " and in the east 
room, which was her greatest triumph, she said 
caressingly, " My nain bonny room ! " All this 
time there seemed to be something that she wanted, 
but the one was dead who always knew what she 
wanted, and they produced many things at which 
she shook her head. They did not know then 
that she was dying, but they followed her through 
the house in some apprehension, and after she re- 
turned to bed they saw that she was becoming 
very weak. Once she said eagerly, " Is that you, 
David ? " and again she thought she heard her 
father knocking the snow off his boots. Her de- 
sire for that which she could not name came back 
to her, and at last they saw that what she wanted 
was the old christening robe. It was brought to her, 
and she unfolded it with trembling, exultant hands, 
and when she had made sure that it was still of 
virgin fairness her old arms went round it ador- 
ingly, and upon her face there was the ineffable 
mysterious glow of motherhood. Suddenly she 
said, " Wha's bairn's dead ? is a bairn of mine 
dead ? " but those watching dared not speak, and 
then slowly as if with an effort of memory she re- 
peated our names aloud in the order in which we 
were born. Only one, who should have come 
third among the ten, did she omit, the one in the 
next room, but at the end, after a pause, she said 

35 1 



MARGARET OGILVY 

her name and repeated it again and again and 
again, lingering over it as if it were the most 
exquisite music and this her dying song. And 
yet it was a very commonplace name. 

They knew now that she was dying. She told 
them to fold up the christening robe and almost 
sharply she watched them put it away, and then for 
some time she talked of the long lovely life that 
had been hers, and of Him to whom she owed it. 
She said good-bye to them all, and at last turned 
her face to the side where her best-beloved had lain, 
and for over an hour she prayed. They only 
caught the words now and again, and the last they 
heard were " God " and " love." I think God was 
smiling when He took her to Him, as He had so 
often smiled at her during those seventy-six years. 

I saw her lying dead, and her face was beautiful 
and serene. But it was the other room I entered 
first, and it was by my sister's side that I fell upon 
my knees. The rounded completeness of a woman's 
life that was my mother's had not been for her. 
She would not have it at the price. " I'll never 
leave you, mother." — " Fine I know you'll never 
leave me." The fierce joy of loving too much, it 
is a terrible thing. My sister's mouth was firmly 
closed, as if she had got her way. 

And now I am left without them, but I trust 
my memory will ever go back to those happy days, 
not to rush through them, but dallying here and 

35 2 



ART THOU AFRAID? 

there, even as my mother wanders through my 
books. And if I also live to a time when age must 
dim my mind and the past comes sweeping back 
like the shades of night over the bare road of the 
present, it will not, I believe, be my youth I shall 
see but hers, not a boy clinging to his mother's 
skirt and crying, " Wait till Pm a man, and you'll 
lie on feathers," but a little girl in a magenta frock 
and a white pinafore, who comes toward me 
through the long parks, singing to herself, and 
carrying her father's dinner in a flaggon. 



Central circulation 

CHiLDhEN'S ROOM 



353 